THE WORKS OF HENRY FIELDING EDITED BY GEORGE SAINTSBURY IN TWELVE VOLUMES VOL. I. JOSEPH ANDREWS VOL. I. CONTENTS. INTRODUCTION. PREFACE. BOOK I. CHAPTER I. _Of writing lives in general, and particularly of Pamela, with a word by the bye of Colley Cibber and others_ CHAPTER II. _Of Mr Jofeph Andrews, his birth, parentage, education, and great endowments, with a word or two concerning anceftors_ CHAPTER III. _Of Mr Abraham Adams the curate, Mrs Slipflop the chambermaid, and others_ CHAPTER IV. _What happened after their journey to London_ CHAPTER V. _The death of Sir Thomas Booby, with the affectionate and mournful behaviour of his widow, and the great purity of Jofeph Andrews_ CHAPTER VI. _How Jofeph Andrews writ a letter to his fifter Pamela_ CHAPTER VII. _Sayings of wife men. A dialogue between the lady and her maid; and a panegyric, or rather fatire, on the paffion of love, in the fublime ftyle_ CHAPTER VIII. _In which, after fome very fine writing, the hiftory goes on, and relates the interview between the lady and Jofeph; where the latter hath fet an example which we defpair of feeing followed by his fex in this vicious age_ CHAPTER IX. _What paffed between the lady and Mrs Slipflop; in which we prophefy there are fome ftrokes which every one will not truly comprehend at the firft reading_ CHAPTER X. _Jofeph writes another letter; his tranfactions with Mr Peter Pounce, &c., with his departure from Lady Booby_ CHAPTER XI. _Of feveral new matters not expected_ CHAPTER XII. _Containing many furprizing adventures which Jofeph Andrews met with on the road, fcarce credible to thofe who have never travelled in a ftage-coach_ CHAPTER XIII. _What happened to Jofeph during his ficknefs at the inn, with the curious difcourfe between him and Mr Barnabas, the parfon of the parifh_ CHAPTER XIV. _Being very full of adventures which fucceeded each other at the inn_ CHAPTER XV. _Showing how Mrs Tow-woufe was a little mollified; and how officious Mr Barnabas and the furgeon were to profecute the thief: with a differtation accounting for their zeal, and that of many other perfons not mentioned in this hiftory_ CHAPTER XVI. _The efcape of the thief. Mr Adams's difappointment. The arrival of two very extraordinary perfonages, and the introduction of parfon Adams to parfon Barnabas_ CHAPTER XVII. _A pleafant difcourfe between the two parfons and the bookfeller, which was broke off by an unlucky accident happening in the inn, which produced a dialogue between Mrs Tow-woufe and her maid of no gentle kind._ CHAPTER XVIII. _The hiftory of Betty the chambermaid, and an account of what occafioned the violent fcene in the preceding chapter_ BOOK II. CHAPTER I. _Of Divifions in Authors_ CHAPTER II. _A furprizing inftance of Mr Adams's fhort memory, with the unfortunate confequences which it brought on Jofeph_ CHAPTER III. _The opinion of two lawyers concerning the fame gentleman, with Mr Adams's inquiry into the religion of his hoft_ CHAPTER IV. _The hiftory of Leonora, or the unfortunate jilt_ CHAPTER V. _A dreadful quarrel which happened at the inn where the company dined, with its bloody confequences to Mr Adams_ CHAPTER VI. _Conclufion of the unfortunate jilt_ CHAPTER VII. _A very fhort chapter, in which parfon Adams went a great way_ CHAPTER VIII. _A notable differtation by Mr Abraham Adams; wherein that gentleman appears in a political light_ CHAPTER IX. _In which the gentleman difcants on bravery and heroic virtue, till an unlucky accident puts an end to the difcourfe_ CHAPTER X. _Giving an account of the ftrange cataftrophe of the preceding adventure, which drew poor Adams into frefh calamities; and who the woman was who owed the prefervation of her chaftity to his victorious arm_ CHAPTER XI. _What happened to them while before the juftice. A chapter very full of learning_ CHAPTER XII. _A very delightful adventure, as well to the perfons concerned as to the good-natured reader_ CHAPTER XIII. _A differtation concerning high people and low people, with Mrs Slipflop's departure in no very good temper of mind, and the evil plight in which fhe left Adams and his company_ LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. PORTRAIT OF FIELDING, FROM BUST IN THE SHIRE HALL, TAUNTON "JOSEPH, I AM SORRY TO HEAR SUCH COMPLAINTS AGAINST YOU" THE HOSTLER PRESENTED HIM A BILL JOSEPH THANKED HER ON HIS KNEES GENERAL INTRODUCTION. There are few amufements more dangerous for an author than the indulgence in ironic defcriptions of his own work. If the irony is depreciatory, pofterity is but too likely to fay, "Many a true word is fpoken in jeft;" if it is encomiaftic, the fame ruthlefs and ungrateful critic is but too likely to take it as an involuntary confeffion of folly and vanity. But when Fielding, in one of his ferio-comic introductions to _Tom Jones_, defcribed it as "this prodigious work," he all unintentionally (for he was the leaft pretentious of men) anticipated the verdict which pofterity almoft at once, and with ever-increafing fuffrage of the beft judges as time went on, was about to pafs not merely upon this particular book, but upon his whole genius and his whole production as a novelift. His work in other kinds is of a very different order of excellence. It is fufficiently interefting at times in itfelf; and always more than fufficiently interefting as his; for which reafons, as well as for the further one that it is comparatively little known, a confiderable felection from it is offered to the reader in the laft two volumes of this edition. Until the prefent occafion (which made it neceffary that I fhould acquaint myfelf with it) I own that my own knowledge of thefe mifcellaneous writings was by no means thorough. It is now pretty complete; but the idea which I previoufly had of them at firft and fecond hand, though a little improved, has not very materially altered. Though in all this hack-work Fielding difplayed, partially and at intervals, the fame qualities which he difplayed eminently and conftantly in the four great books here given, he was not, as the French idiom expreffes it, _dans fon affiette_, in his own natural and impregnable difpofition and fituation of character and ability, when he was occupied on it. The novel was for him that _affiette_; and all his novels are here. Although Henry Fielding lived in quite modern times, although by family and connections he was of a higher rank than moft men of letters, and although his genius was at once recognifed by his contemporaries fo foon as it difplayed itfelf in its proper fphere, his biography until very recently was by no means full; and the moft recent refearches, including thofe of Mr Auftin Dobfon--a critic unfurpaffed for combination of literary faculty and knowledge of the eighteenth century--have not altogether fufficed to fill up the gaps. His family, faid to have defcended from a member of the great houfe of Hapfburg who came to England in the reign of Henry II., diftinguifhed itfelf in the Wars of the Rofes, and in the feventeenth century was advanced to the peerages of Denbigh in England and (later) of Defmond in Ireland. The novelift was the grandfon of John Fielding, Canon of Salifbury, the fifth fon of the firft Earl of Defmond of this creation. The canon's third fon, Edmond, entered the army, ferved under Marlborough, and married Sarah Gold or Gould, daughter of a judge of the King's Bench. Their eldeft fon was Henry, who was born on April 22, 1707, and had an uncertain number of brothers and fifters of the whole blood. After his firft wife's death, General Fielding (for he attained that rank) married again. The moft remarkable offfpring of the firft marriage, next to Henry, was his fifter Sarah, alfo a novelift, who wrote David Simple; of the fecond, John, afterwards Sir John Fielding, who, though blind, fucceeded his half-brother as a Bow Street magiftrate, and in that office combined an equally honourable record with a longer tenure. Fielding was born at Sharpham Park in Somerfetfhire, the feat of his maternal grandfather; but moft of his early youth was fpent at Eaft Stour in Dorfetfhire, to which his father removed after the judge's death. He is faid to have received his firft education under a parfon of the neighbourhood named Oliver, in whom a very uncomplimentary tradition fees the original of Parfon Trulliber. He was then certainly fent to Eton, where he did not wafte his time as regards learning, and made feveral valuable friends. But the dates of his entering and leaving fchool are alike unknown; and his fubfequent fojourn at Leyden for two years--though there is no reafon to doubt it--depends even lefs upon any pofitive documentary evidence. This famous Univerfity ftill had a great repute as a training fchool in law, for which profeffion he was intended; but the reafon why he did not receive the even then far more ufual completion of a public fchool education by a fojourn at Oxford or Cambridge may be fufpected to be different. It may even have had fomething to do with a curious efcapade of his about which not very much is known--an attempt to carry off a pretty heirefs of Lyme, named Sarah Andrew. Even at Leyden, however, General Fielding feems to have been unable or unwilling to pay his fon's expenfes, which muft have been far lefs there than at an Englifh Univerfity; and Henry's return to London in 1728-29 is faid to have been due to fheer impecuniofity. When he returned to England, his father was good enough to make him an allowance of L200 nominal, which appears to have been equivalent to L0 actual. And as practically nothing is known of him for the next fix or feven years, except the fact of his having worked induftrioufly enough at a large number of not very good plays of the lighter kind, with a few poems and mifcellanies, it is reafonably enough fuppofed that he lived by his pen. The only product of this period which has kept (or indeed which ever received) competent applaufe is _Tom Thumb, or the Tragedy of Tragedies_, a following of courfe of the _Rehearfal_, but full of humour and fpirit. The moft fucceffful of his other dramatic works were the _Mock Doctor_ and the _Mifer_, adaptations of Moliere's famous pieces. His undoubted connection with the ftage, and the fact of the contemporary exiftence of a certain Timothy Fielding, helped fuggeftions of lefs dignified occupations as actor, booth-keeper, and fo forth; but thefe have long been difcredited and indeed difproved. In or about 1735, when Fielding was twenty-eight, we find him in a new, a more brilliant and agreeable, but even a more tranfient phafe. He had married (we do not know when or where) Mifs Charlotte Cradock, one of three fifters who lived at Salifbury (it is to be obferved that Fielding's entire connections, both in life and letters, are with the Weftern Counties and London), who were certainly of competent means, and for whofe alleged illegitimacy there is no evidence but an unfupported fling of that old maid of genius, Richardfon. The defcriptions both of Sophia and of Amelia are faid to have been taken from this lady; her good looks and her amiability are as well eftablifhed as anything of the kind can be in the abfence of photographs and affidavits; and it is certain that her hufband was paffionately attached to her, during their too fhort married life. His method, however, of fhowing his affection fmacked in fome ways too much of the foibles which he has attributed to Captain Booth, and of thofe which we muft fufpect Mr Thomas Jones would alfo have exhibited, if he had not been adopted as Mr Allworthy's heir, and had not had Mr Weftern's fortune to fhare and look forward to. It is true that grave breaches have been made by recent criticifm in the very picturefque and circumftantial ftory told on the fubject by Murphy, the firft of Fielding's biographers. This legend was that Fielding, having fucceeded by the death of his mother to a fmall eftate at Eaft Stour, worth about L200 a year, and having received L1500 in ready money as his wife's fortune, got through the whole in three years by keeping open houfe, with a large retinue in "coftly yellow liveries," and fo forth. In details, this ftory has been fimply riddled. His mother had died long before; he was certainly not away from London three years, or anything like it; and fo forth. At the fame time, the beft and fobereft judges agree that there is an intrinfic probability, a confenfus (if a vague one) of tradition, and a chain of almoft unmiftakably perfonal references in the novels, which plead for a certain amount of truth, at the bottom of a much embellifhed legend. At any rate, if Fielding eftablifhed himfelf in the country, it was not long before he returned to town; for early in 1736 we find him back again, and not merely a playwright, but leffee of the "Little Theatre" in the Haymarket. The plays which he produced here--fatirico-political pieces, fuch as _Pafquin_ and the _Hiftorical Regifter_--were popular enough, but offended the Government; and in 1737 a new bill regulating theatrical performances, and inftituting the Lord Chamberlain's control, was paffed. This meafure put an end directly to the "Great Mogul's Company," as Fielding had called his troop, and indirectly to its manager's career as a playwright. He did indeed write a few pieces in future years, but they were of the fmalleft importance. After this check he turned at laft to a ferious profeffion, entered himfelf of the Middle Temple in November of the fame year, and was called three years later; but during thefe years, and indeed for fome time afterwards, our information about him is ftill of the vagueft character. Nobody doubts that he had a large fhare in the _Champion_, an effay-periodical on the ufual eighteenth-century model, which began to appear in 1739, and which is ftill occafionally confulted for the work that is certainly or probably his. He went the Weftern Circuit, and attended the Wiltfhire Seffions, after he was called, giving up his contributions to periodicals foon after that event. But he foon returned to literature proper, or rather made his _debut_ in it, with the immortal book now republifhed. The _Hiftory of the Adventures of Jofeph Andrews, and his Friend Mr Abraham Adams_, appeared in February 1742, and its author received from Andrew Millar, the publifher, the fum of L183, 11s. Even greater works have fetched much fmaller fums; but it will be admitted that _Jofeph Andrews_ was not dear. The advantage, however, of prefenting a furvey of an author's life uninterrupted by criticifm is fo clear, that what has to be faid about _Jofeph_ may be conveniently poftponed for the moment. Immediately after its publication the author fell back upon mifcellaneous writing, and in the next year (1743) collected and iffued three volumes of _Mifcellanies_. In the two firft volumes the only thing of much intereft is the unfinifhed and unequal, but in part powerful, _Journey from this World to the Next_, an attempt of a kind which Fontenelle and others, following Lucian, had made very popular with the time. But the third volume of the _Mifcellanies_ deferved a lefs modeft and gregarious appearance, for it contained, and is wholly occupied by, the wonderful and terrible fatire of _Jonathan Wild_, the greateft piece of pure irony in Englifh out of Swift. Soon after the publication of the book, a great calamity came on Fielding. His wife had been very ill when he wrote the preface; foon afterwards fhe was dead. They had taken the chance, had made the choice, that the more prudent and lefs wife ftudent-hero and heroine of Mr Browning's _Youth and Art_ had fhunned; they had no doubt "fighed deep, laughed free, Starved, feafted, defpaired," and we need not queftion, that they had alfo "been happy." Except this fad event and its rather incongruous fequel, Fielding's marriage to his wife's maid Mary Daniel--a marriage, however, which did not take place till full four years later, and which by all accounts fupplied him with a faithful and excellent companion and nurfe, and his children with a kind ftepmother--little or nothing is again known of this elufive man of genius between the publication of the _Mifcellanies_ in 1743, and that of _Tom Jones_ in 1749. The fecond marriage itfelf in November 1747; an interview which Jofeph Warton had with him rather more than a year earlier (one of the very few direct interviews we have); the publication of two anti-Jacobite newfpapers (Fielding was always a ftrong Whig and Hanoverian), called the _True Patriot_ and the _Jacobite's Journal_ in 1745 and the following years; fome indiftinct traditions about refidences at Twickenham and elfewhere, and fome, more precife but not much more authenticated, refpecting patronage by the Duke of Bedford, Mr Lyttelton, Mr Allen, and others, pretty well fum up the whole. _Tom Jones_ was publifhed in February (a favourite month with Fielding or his publifher Millar) 1749; and as it brought him the, for thofe days, very confiderable fum of L600 to which Millar added another hundred later, the novelift muft have been, for a time at any rate, relieved from his chronic penury. But he had already, by Lyttelton's intereft, fecured his firft and laft piece of preferment, being made Juftice of the Peace for Weftminfter, an office on which he entered with characteriftic vigour. He was qualified for it not merely by a folid knowledge of the law, and by great natural abilities, but by his thorough kindnefs of heart; and, perhaps, it may alfo be added, by his long years of queer experience on (as Mr Carlyle would have faid) the "burning marl" of the London Bohemia. Very fhortly afterwards he was chofen Chairman of Quarter Seffions, and eftablifhed himfelf in Bow Street. The Bow Street magiftrate of that time occupied a moft fingular pofition, and was more like a French Prefect of Police or even a Minifter of Public Safety than a mere juftice. Yet he was ill paid. Fielding fays that the emoluments, which before his acceffion had but been L500 a year of "dirty" money, were by his own action but L300 of clean; and the work, if properly performed, was very fevere. That he performed it properly all competent evidence fhows, a foolifh, inconclufive, and I fear it muft be faid emphatically fnobbifh ftory of Walpole's notwithftanding. In particular, he broke up a gang of cut-throat thieves, which had been the terror of London. But his tenure of the poft was fhort enough, and fcarcely extended to five years. His health had long been broken, and he was now conftantly attacked by gout, fo that he had frequently to retreat on Bath from Bow Street, or his fuburban cottage of Fordhook, Ealing. But he did not relax his literary work. His pen was active with pamphlets concerning his office; _Amelia_, his laft novel, appeared towards the clofe of 1751; and next year faw the beginning of a new paper, the _Covent Garden Journal_, which appeared twice a week, ran for the greater part of the year, and died in November. Its great author did not fee that month twice again. In the fpring of 1753 he grew worfe; and after a year's ftruggle with ill health, hard work, and hard weather, leffer meafures being pronounced ufelefs, was perfuaded to try the "Portugal Voyage," of which he has left fo charming a record in the _Journey to Lifbon_. He left Fordhook on June 26, 1754, reached Lifbon in Auguft, and, dying there on the 8th of October, was buried in the cemetery of the Eftrella. Of not many writers perhaps does a clearer notion, as far as their perfonality goes, exift in the general mind that interefts itfelf at all in literature than of Fielding. Yet more than once a warning has been founded, efpecially by his beft and moft recent biographer, to the effect that this idea is founded upon very little warranty of fcripture. The truth is, that as the foregoing record--which, brief as it is, is a fufficiently faithful fummary--will have fhown, we know very little about Fielding. We have hardly any letters of his, and fo lack the beft by far and the moft revealing of all character-portraits; we have but one important autobiographic fragment, and though that is of the higheft intereft and value, it was written far in the valley of the fhadow of death, it is not in the leaft retrofpective, and it affords but dim and inferential light on his younger, healthier, and happier days and ways. He came, moreover, juft fhort of one fet of men of letters, of whom we have a great deal of perfonal knowledge, and juft beyond another. He was neither of thofe about Addifon, nor of thofe about Johnfon. No intimate friend of his has left us anything elaborate about him. On the other hand, we have a far from inconfiderable body of documentary evidence, of a kind often by no means truftworthy. The beft part of it is contained in the letters of his coufin, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, and the reminifcences or family traditions of her grand-daughter, Lady Louifa Stuart. But Lady Mary, vivacious and agreeable as fhe is, had with all her talent a very confiderable knack of writing for effect, of drawing ftrong contrafts and the like; and it is not quite certain that fhe faw very much of Fielding in the laft and moft interefting third of his life. Another witnefs, Horace Walpole, to lefs knowledge and equally dubious accuracy, added decided ill-will, which may have been due partly to the fhrinking of a dilettante and a fop from a burly Bohemian; but I fear is alfo confequent upon the fact that Horace could not afford to defpife Fielding's birth, and knew him to be vaftly his own fuperior in genius. We hear fomething of him again from Richardfon; and Richardfon hated him with the hatred of diffimilar genius, of inferior focial pofition, and, laftly, of the cat for the dog who touzles and worries her. Johnfon partly inherited or fhared Richardfon's averfion, partly was blinded to Fielding's genius by his aggreffive Whiggery. I fear, too, that he was incapable of appreciating it for reafons other than political. It is certain that Johnfon, fane and robuft as he was, was never quite at eafe before genius of the gigantic kind, either in dead or living. Whether he did not like to have to look up too much, or was actually unable to do fo, it is certain that Shakefpeare, Milton, Swift, and Fielding, thofe four Atlantes of Englifh verfe and profe, all affected him with lukewarm admiration, or with pofitive diflike, for which it is vain to attempt to affign any uniform fecondary caufe, political or other. It may be permitted to hint another reafon. All Johnfon's moft fharp-fighted critics have noticed, though moft have difcreetly refrained from infifting on, his "thorn-in-the-flefh," the combination in him of very ftrong phyfical paffions with the deepeft fenfe of the moral and religious duty of abftinence. It is perhaps impoffible to imagine anything more diftafteful to a man fo buffeted, than the extreme indulgence with which Fielding regards, and the eafy freedom, not to fay gufto, with which he depicts, thofe who fuccumb to fimilar temptation. Only by fuppofing the workings of fome fubtle influence of this kind is it poffible to explain, even in fo capricious a humour as Johnfon's, the famous and abfurd application of the term "barren rafcal" to a writer who, dying almoft young, after having for many years lived a life of pleafure, and then for four or five one of laborious official duty, has left work anything but fmall in actual bulk, and fertile with the moft luxuriant growth of intellectual originality. Partly on the _obiter dicta_ of perfons like thefe, partly on the ftill more tempting and ftill more treacherous ground of indications drawn from his works, a Fielding of fantafy has been conftructed, which in Thackeray's admirable fketch attains real life and immortality as a creature of art, but which poffeffes rather dubious claims as a hiftorical character. It is aftonifhing how this Fielding of fantafy finks and fhrivels when we begin to apply the horrid tefts of criticifm to his component parts. The _eidolon_, with inked ruffles and a towel round his head, fits in the Temple and dafhes off articles for the _Covent Garden Journal_; then comes Criticifm, hellifh maid, and reminds us that when the _Covent Garden Journal_ appeared, Fielding's wild oats, if ever fown at all, had been fown long ago; that he was a bufy magiftrate and houfeholder in Bow Street; and that, if he had towels round his head, it was probably lefs becaufe he had exceeded in liquor than becaufe his Grace of Newcaftle had given him a headache by wanting elaborate plans and fchemes prepared at an hour's notice. Lady Mary, apparently with fome envy, tells us that he could "feel rapture with his cook-maid." "Which many has," as Mr Ridley remarks, from Xanthias Phoceus downwards; but when we remember the hiftoric fact that he married this maid (not a "cook-maid" at all), and that though he always fpeaks of her with warm affection and hearty refpect, fuch "raptures" as we have of his clearly refer to a very different woman, who was both a lady and a beautiful one, we begin a little to fhake our heads. Horace Walpole at fecond-hand draws us a Fielding, pigging with low companions in a houfe kept like a hedge tavern; Fielding himfelf, within a year or two, fhows us more than half-undefignedly in the _Voyage to Lifbon_ that he was very careful about the appointments and decency of his table, that he ftood rather upon ceremony in regard to his own treatment of his family, and the treatment of them and himfelf by others, and that he was altogether a perfon orderly, correct, and even a little finikin. Nor is there the flighteft reafonable reafon to regard this as a piece of hypocrify, a vice as alien from the Fielding of fancy as from the Fielding of fact, and one the particular manifeftation of which, in this particular place, would have been equally unlikely and unintelligible. It may be afked whether I propofe to fubftitute for the traditional Fielding a quite different perfon, of regular habits and methodical economy. Certainly not. The traditional eftimate of great men is rarely wrong altogether, but it conftantly has a habit of exaggerating and dramatifing their characteriftics. For fome things in Fielding's career we have pofitive evidence of document, and evidence hardly lefs certain of probability. Although I believe the beft judges are now of opinion that his impecuniofity has been overcharged, he certainly had experiences which did not often fall to the lot of even a cadet of good family in the eighteenth century. There can be no reafonable doubt that he was a man who had a leaning towards pretty girls and bottles of good wine; and I fhould fuppofe that if the girl were kind and fairly winfome, he would not have infifted that fhe fhould poffefs Helen's beauty, that if the bottle of good wine were not forthcoming, he would have been very tolerant of a mug of good ale. He may very poffibly have drunk more than he fhould, and loft more than he could conveniently pay. It may be put down as morally afcertained that towards all thefe weakneffes of humanity, and others like unto them, he held an attitude which was lefs that of the unaffailable philofopher than that of the fympathifer, indulgent and excufing. In regard more efpecially to what are commonly called moral delinquencies, this attitude was fo decided as to fhock fome people even in thofe days, and many in thefe. Juft when the firft fheets of this edition were paffing through the prefs, a violent attack was made in a newfpaper correfpondence on the morality of _Tom Jones_ by certain notorious advocates of Purity, as fome fay, of Pruriency and Prudery combined, according to lefs complimentary eftimates. Even midway between the two periods we find the admirable Mifs Ferrier, a fifter of Fielding's own craft, who fometimes had touches of nature and fatire not far inferior to his own, expreffing by the mouth of one of her characters with whom fhe feems partly to agree, the fentiment that his works are "vanifhing like noxious exhalations." Towards any mifdoing by perfons of the one fex towards perfons of the other, when it involved brutality or treachery, Fielding was pitilefs; but when treachery and brutality were not concerned, he was, to fay the leaft, facile. So, too, he probably knew by experience--he certainly knew by native fhrewdnefs and acquired obfervation--that to look too much on the wine when it is red, or on the cards when they are parti-coloured, is ruinous to health and fortune; but he thought not over badly of any man who did thefe things. Still it is poffible to admit this in him, and to ftop fhort of that idea of a carelefs and recklefs _viveur_ which has fo often been put forward. In particular, Lady Mary's view of his childlike enjoyment of the moment has been, I think, much exaggerated by pofterity, and was probably not a little miftaken by the lady herfelf. There are two moods in which the motto is _Carpe diem_, one a mood of fimply childifh hurry, the other one where behind the enjoyment of the moment lurks, and in which the enjoyment of the moment is not a little heightened by, that vaft ironic confcioufnefs of the before and after, which I at leaft fee everywhere in the background of Fielding's work. The man, however, of whom we know fo little, concerns us much lefs than the author of the works, of which it only refts with ourfelves to know everything. I have above claffed Fielding as one of the four Atlantes of Englifh verfe and profe, and I doubt not that both the phrafe and the application of it to him will meet with queftion and demur. I have only to interject, as the critic fo often has to interject, a requeft to the court to take what I fay in the fenfe in which I fay it. I do not mean that Shakefpeare, Milton, Swift, and Fielding are in all or even in moft refpects on a level. I do not mean that the three laft are in all refpects of the greateft names in Englifh literature. I only mean that, in a certain quality, which for want of a better word I have chofen to call Atlantean, they ftand alone. Each of them, for the metaphor is applicable either way, carries a whole world on his fhoulders, or looks down on a whole world from his natural altitude. The worlds are different, but they are worlds; and though the attitude of the giants is different alfo, it agrees in all of them on the points of competence and ftrength. Take whomfoever elfe we may among our men of letters, and we fhall find this characteriftic to be in comparifon wanting. Thefe four carry their world, and are not carried by it; and if it, in the language fo dear to Fielding himfelf, were to crafh and fhatter, the inquiry, "_Que vous refte-t-il?_" could be anfwered by each, "_Moi!_" The appearance which Fielding makes is no doubt the moft modeft of the four. He has not Shakefpeare's abfolute univerfality, and in fact not merely the poet's tongue, but the poet's thought feems to have been denied him. His fphere is not the ideal like Milton's. His irony, fplendid as it is, falls a little fhort of that diabolical magnificence which exalts Swift to the point whence, in his own way, he furveys all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory or vainglory of them. All Fielding's critics have noted the manner, in a certain fenfe modeft, in another oftentatious, in which he feems to confine himfelf to the prefentation of things Englifh. They might have added to the prefentation of things Englifh--as they appear in London, and on the Weftern Circuit, and on the Bath Road. But this apparent parochialifm has never deceived good judges. It did not deceive Lady Mary, who had feen the men and manners of very many climes; it did not deceive Gibbon, who was not efpecially prone to overvalue things Englifh, and who could look down from twenty centuries on things ephemeral. It deceives, indeed, I am told, fome excellent perfons at the prefent day, who think Fielding's microcofm a "toylike world," and imagine that Ruffian Nihilifts and French Naturalifts have gone beyond it. It will deceive no one who has lived for fome competent fpace of time a life during which he has tried to regard his fellow-creatures and himfelf, as nearly as a mortal may, _fub fpecie aeternitatis_. As this is in the main an introduction to a complete reprint of Fielding's four great novels, the juftification in detail of the eftimate juft made or hinted of the novelift's genius will be beft and moft fitly made by a brief fucceffive difcuffion of the four as they are here prefented, with fome fubfequent remarks on the _Mifcellanies_ here felected. And, indeed, it is not fanciful to perceive in each book a fomewhat different prefentment of the author's genius; though in no one of the four is any one of his mafterly qualities abfent. There is tendernefs even in _Jonathan Wild_; there are touches in _Jofeph Andrews_ of that irony of the Preacher, the laft echo of which is heard amid the kindly refignation of the _Journey to Lifbon_, in the fentence, "Whereas envy of all things moft expofes us to danger from others, fo contempt of all things beft fecures us from them." But on the whole it is fafe to fay that _Jofeph Andrews_ beft prefents Fielding's mifchievous and playful wit; _Jonathan Wild_ his half-Lucianic half-Swiftian irony; _Tom Jones_ his unerring knowledge of human nature, and his conftructive faculty; _Amelia_ his tendernefs, his _mitis fapientia_, his obfervation of the details of life. And firft of the firft. _The Hiftory of the Adventures of Jofeph Andrews and his friend Mr Abraham Adams_ was, as has been faid above, publifhed in February 1742. A facfimile of the agreement between author and publifher will be given in the fecond volume of this feries; and it is not uninterefting to obferve that the witnefs, William Young, is none other than the afferted original of the immortal Mr Adams himfelf. He might, on Balzac's plea in a tolerably well-known anecdote, have demanded half of the L183, 11s. Of the other origins of the book we have a pretty full account, partly documentary. That it is "writ in the manner of Cervantes," and is intended as a kind of comic epic, is the author's own ftatement--no doubt as near the actual truth as is confiftent with comic-epic theory. That there are refemblances to Scarron, to Le Sage, and to other practitioners of the Picarefque novel is certain; and it was inevitable that there fhould be. Of directer and more immediate models or ftarting-points one is undoubted; the other, though lefs generally admitted, not much lefs indubitable to my mind. The parody of Richardfon's _Pamela_, which was little more than a year earlier (Nov. 1740), is avowed, open, flagrant; nor do I think that the author was fo foon carried away by the greater and larger tide of his own invention as fome critics feem to hold. He is always more or lefs returning to the ironic charge; and the multiplicity of the affailants of Jofeph's virtue only difguifes the refemblance to the long-drawn dangers of Pamela from a fingle ravifher. But Fielding was alfo well acquainted with Marivaux's _Payfan Parvenu_, and the refemblances between that book and _Jofeph Andrews_ are much ftronger than Fielding's admirers have always been willing to admit. This recalcitrance has, I think, been mainly due to the erroneous conception of Marivaux as, if not a mere fribble, yet a Drefden-Shepherdefs kind of writer, good at "precioufnefs" and patch-and-powder manners, but nothing more. There was, in fact, a very ftrong fatiric and ironic touch in the author of _Marianne_, and I do not think that I was too rafh when fome years ago I ventured to fpeak of him as "playing Fielding to his own Richardfon" in the _Payfan Parvenu_. Origins, however, and indebtednefs and the like, are, when great work is concerned, queftions for the ftudy and the lecture-room, for the literary hiftorian and the profeffional critic, rather than for the reader, however intelligent and alert, who wifhes to enjoy a mafterpiece, and is content fimply to enjoy it. It does not really matter how clofe to anything elfe fomething which poffeffes independent goodnefs is; the very utmoft technical originality, the moft fpotlefs purity from the fainteft taint of fuggeftion, will not fuffice to confer merit on what does not otherwife poffefs it. Whether, as I rather think, Fielding purfued the plan he had formed _ab incepto_, or whether he cavalierly neglected it, or whether the current of his own genius carried him off his legs and landed him, half againft his will, on the fhore of originality, are queftions for the Schools, and, as I venture to think, not for the higher forms in them. We have _Jofeph Andrews_ as it is; and we may be abundantly thankful for it. The contents of it, as of all Fielding's work in this kind, include certain things for which the moderns are fcantly grateful. Of late years, and not of late years only, there has grown up a fingular and perhaps an ignorant impatience of digreffions, of epifodes, of tales within a tale. The example of this which has been moft maltreated is the "Man of the Hill" epifode in _Tom Jones_; but the ftories of the "Unfortunate Jilt" and of Mr Wilfon in our prefent fubject, do not appear to me to be much lefs obnoxious to the cenfure; and _Amelia_ contains more than one or two things of the fame kind. Me they do not greatly difturb; and I fee many defences for them befides the obvious, and at a pinch fufficient one, that divagations of this kind exifted in all Fielding's Spanifh and French models, that the public of the day expected them, and fo forth. This defence is enough, but it is eafy to amplify and reintrench it. It is not by any means the fact that the Picarefque novel of adventure is the only or the chief form of fiction which prefcribes or admits thefe epifodic excurfions. All the claffical epics have them; many eaftern and other ftories prefent them; they are common, if not invariable, in the abundant mediaeval literature of profe and verfe romance; they are not unknown by any means in the modern novel; and you will very rarely hear a ftory told orally at the dinner-table or in the fmoking-room without fomething of the kind. There muft, therefore, be fomething in them correfponding to an infeparable accident of that moft unchanging of all things, human nature. And I do not think the fpecial form with which we are here concerned by any means the worft that they have taken. It has the grand and prominent virtue of being at once and eafily fkippable. There is about Cervantes and Le Sage, about Fielding and Smollett, none of the treachery of the modern novelift, who induces the confcientious reader to drag through pages, chapters, and fometimes volumes which have nothing to do with the action, for fear he fhould mifs fomething that has to do with it. Thefe great men have a fearlefs franknefs, and almoft tell you in fo many words when and what you may fkip. Therefore, if the "Curious Impertinent," and the "Baneful Marriage," and the "Man of the Hill," and the "Lady of Quality," get in the way, when you defire to "read for the ftory," you have nothing to do but turn the page till _finis_ comes. The defence has already been made by an illuftrious hand for Fielding's inter-chapters and exordiums. It appears to me to be almoft more applicable to his infertions. And fo we need not trouble ourfelves any more either about the infertions or about the exordiums. They both pleafe me; the fecond clafs has pleafed perfons much better worth pleafing than I can pretend to be; but the making or marring of the book lies elfewhere. I do not think that it lies in the conftruction, though Fielding's following of the ancients, both fincere and fatiric, has impofed a falfe air of regularity upon that. The Odyffey of Jofeph, of Fanny, and of their ghoftly mentor and bodily guard is, in truth, a little haphazard, and might have been longer or fhorter without any difcreet man approving it the more or the lefs therefor. The real merits lie partly in the abounding humour and fatire of the artift's criticifm, but even more in the marvellous vivacity and fertility of his creation. For the very firft time in Englifh profe fiction every character is alive, every incident is capable of having happened. There are lively touches in the Elizabethan romances; but they are buried in verbiage, fwathed in ftage coftume, choked and fettered by their authors' want of art. The quality of Bunyan's knowledge of men was not much inferior to Shakefpeare's, or at leaft to Fielding's; but the range and the refults of it were cramped by his fingle theological purpofe, and his unvaried allegoric or typical form. Why Defoe did not difcover the New World of Fiction, I at leaft have never been able to put into any brief critical formula that fatiffies me, and I have never feen it put by any one elfe. He had not only feen it afar off, he had made landings and defcents on it; he had carried off and exhibited in triumph natives fuch as Robinfon Crufoe, as Man Friday, as Moll Flanders, as William the Quaker; but he had conquered, fubdued, and fettled no province therein. I like _Pamela_; I like it better than fome perfons who admire Richardfon on the whole more than I do, feem to like it. But, as in all its author's work, the handling feems to me academic--the working out on paper of an ingenioufly conceived problem rather than the obfervation or evolution of actual or poffible life. I fhould not greatly fear to pufh the comparifon even into foreign countries; but it is well to obferve limits. Let us be content with holding that in England at leaft, without prejudice to anything further, Fielding was the firft to difplay the qualities of the perfect novelift as diftinguifhed from the romancer. What are thofe qualities, as fhown in _Jofeph Andrews_? The faculty of arranging a probable and interefting courfe of action is one, of courfe, and Fielding fhowed it here. But I do not think that it is at any time the greateft one; and nobody denies that he made great advances in this direction later. The faculty of lively dialogue is another; and that he has not often been refufed; but much the fame may be faid of it. The interfperfing of appropriate defcription is another; but here alfo we fhall not find him exactly a paragon. It is in character--the chief _differentia_ of the novel as diftinguifhed not merely from its elder fifter the romance, and its coufin the drama, but ftill more from every other kind of literature--that Fielding ftands even here pre-eminent. No one that I can think of, except his greateft fucceffor in the prefent century, has the fame unfailing gift of breathing life into every character he creates or borrows; and even Thackeray draws, if I may ufe the phrafe, his characters more in the flat and lefs in the round than Fielding. Whether in Blifil he once failed, we muft difcufs hereafter; he has failed nowhere in _Jofeph Andrews_. Some of his fketches may require the caution that they are eighteenth-century men and women; fome the warning that they are obvioufly caricatured, or fet in defigned profile, or merely fketched. But they are all alive. The finical eftimate of Gray (it is a horrid joy to think how perfectly capable Fielding was of having joined in that practical joke of the young gentlemen of Cambridge, which made Gray change his college), while difmiffing thefe light things with patronage, had to admit that "parfon Adams is perfectly well, fo is Mrs Slipflop." "They _were_, Mr Gray," faid fome one once, "they were more perfectly well, and in a higher kind, than anything you ever did; though you were a pretty workman too." Yes, parfon Adams is perfectly well, and fo is Mrs Slipflop. But fo are they all. Even the hero and heroine, tied and bound as they are by the neceffity under which their maker lay of preferving Jofeph's Jofeph-hood, and of making Fanny the example of a franker and lefs interefted virtue than her fifter-in-law that might have been, are furprifingly human where moft writers would have made them fticks. And the reft require no allowance. Lady Booby, few as are the ftrokes given to her, is not much lefs alive than Lady Bellafton. Mr Trulliber, monfter and not at all delicate monfter as he is, is alfo a man, and when he lays it down that no one even in his own houfe fhall drink when he "caaled vurft," one can but pay his maker the tribute of that filent fhudder of admiration which hails the addition of one more everlafting entity to the world of thought and fancy. And Mr Tow-woufe is real, and Mrs Tow-woufe is more real ftill, and Betty is real; and the coachman, and Mifs Grave-airs, and all the wonderful crew from firft to laft. The dreffes they wear, the manners they exhibit, the laws they live under, the very foods and drinks they live upon, are "paft like the fhadows on glaffes"--to the comfort and rejoicing of fome, to the greater or lefs forrow of others. But _they_ are there--alive, full of blood, full of breath as we are, and, in truth, I fear a little more fo. For fome purpofes a century is a gap harder to crofs and more eftranging than a couple of millenniums. But in their cafe the gap is nothing; and it is not too much to fay that as they have ftood the harder teft, they will ftand the eafier. There are very ftriking differences between Nauficaa and Mrs Slipflop; there are differences not lefs ftriking between Mrs Slipflop and Beatrice. But their likenefs is a ftranger and more wonderful thing than any of their unlikeneffes. It is that they are all women, that they are all live citizeneffes of the Land of Matters Unforgot, the fafhion whereof paffeth not away, and the franchife whereof, once acquired, affures immortality. NOTE TO GENERAL INTRODUCTION. _The text of this iffue in the main follows that of the ftandard or firft collected edition of 1762. The variants which the author introduced in fucceffive editions during his lifetime are not inconfiderable; but for the purpofes of the prefent iffue it did not feem neceffary or indeed defirable to take account of them. In the cafe of profe fiction, more than in any other department of literature, it is defirable that work fhould be read in the form which reprefents the completeft intention and execution of the author. Nor have any notes been attempted; for again fuch things, in the cafe of profe fiction, are of very doubtful ufe, and fupply pretty certain ftumbling-blocks to enjoyment; while in the particular cafe of Fielding, the annotation, unlefs extremely capricious, would have to be difguftingly full. Far be it at any rate from the prefent editor to bury thefe delightful creations under an ugly cruft of parallel paffages and mifcellaneous erudition. The fheets, however, have been carefully read in order to prevent the cafual errors which are wont to creep into frequently reprinted texts; and the editor hopes that if any fuch have efcaped him, the efcape will not be attributed to wilful negligence. A few obvious errors, in fpelling of proper names, &c., which occur in the 1762 verfion have been corrected: but wherever the readings of that verfion are poffible they have been preferred. The embellifhments of the edition are partly fanciful and partly "documentary;" fo that it is hoped both claffes of tafte may have fomething to feed upon._ AUTHOR'S PREFACE. As it is poffible the mere Englifh reader may have a different idea of romance from the author of thefe little[A] volumes, and may confequently expect a kind of entertainment not to be found, nor which was even intended, in the following pages, it may not be improper to premife a few words concerning this kind of writing, which I do not remember to have feen hitherto attempted in our language. [A] _Jofeph Andrews_ was originally publifhed in 2 vols. duodecimo. The EPIC, as well as the DRAMA, is divided into tragedy and comedy. HOMER, who was the father of this fpecies of poetry, gave us a pattern of both thefe, though that of the latter kind is entirely loft; which Ariftotle tells us, bore the fame relation to comedy which his Iliad bears to tragedy. And perhaps, that we have no more inftances of it among the writers of antiquity, is owing to the lofs of this great pattern, which, had it furvived, would have found its imitators equally with the other poems of this great original. And farther, as this poetry may be tragic or comic, I will not fcruple to fay it may be likewife either in verfe or profe: for though it wants one particular, which the critic enumerates in the conftituent parts of an epic poem, namely metre; yet, when any kind of writing contains all its other parts, fuch as fable, action, characters, fentiments, and diction, and is deficient in metre only, it feems, I think, reafonable to refer it to the epic; at leaft, as no critic hath thought proper to range it under any other head, or to affign it a particular name to itfelf. Thus the Telemachus of the archbifhop of Cambray appears to me of the epic kind, as well as the Odyffey of Homer; indeed, it is much fairer and more reafonable to give it a name common with that fpecies from which it differs only in a fingle inftance, than to confound it with thofe which it refembles in no other. Such are thofe voluminous works, commonly called Romances, namely, Clelia, Cleopatra, Aftraea, Caffandra, the Grand Cyrus, and innumerable others, which contain, as I apprehend, very little inftruction or entertainment. Now, a comic romance is a comic epic poem in profe; differing from comedy, as the ferious epic from tragedy: its action being more extended and comprehenfive; containing a much larger circle of incidents, and introducing a greater variety of characters. It differs from the ferious romance in its fable and action, in this; that as in the one thefe are grave and folemn, fo in the other they are light and ridiculous: it differs in its characters by introducing perfons of inferior rank, and confequently, of inferior manners, whereas the grave romance fets the higheft before us: laftly, in its fentiments and diction; by preferving the ludicrous inftead of the fublime. In the diction, I think, burlefque itfelf may be fometimes admitted; of which many inftances will occur in this work, as in the defcription of the battles, and fome other places, not neceffary to be pointed out to the claffical reader, for whofe entertainment thofe parodies or burlefque imitations are chiefly calculated. But though we have fometimes admitted this in our diction, we have carefully excluded it from our fentiments and characters; for there it is never properly introduced, unlefs in writings of the burlefque kind, which this is not intended to be. Indeed, no two fpecies of writing can differ more widely than the comic and the burlefque; for as the latter is ever the exhibition of what is monftrous and unnatural, and where our delight, if we examine it, arifes from the furprizing abfurdity, as in appropriating the manners of the higheft to the loweft, or _e converfo_; fo in the former we fhould ever confine ourfelves ftrictly to nature, from the juft imitation of which will flow all the pleafure we can this way convey to a fenfible reader. And perhaps there is one reafon why a comic writer fhould of all others be the leaft excufed for deviating from nature, fince it may not be always fo eafy for a ferious poet to meet with the great and the admirable; but life everywhere furnifhes an accurate obferver with the ridiculous. I have hinted this little concerning burlefque, becaufe I have often heard that name given to performances which have been truly of the comic kind, from the author's having fometimes admitted it in his diction only; which, as it is the drefs of poetry, doth, like the drefs of men, eftablifh characters (the one of the whole poem, and the other of the whole man), in vulgar opinion, beyond any of their greater excellences: but furely, a certain drollery in ftile, where characters and fentiments are perfectly natural, no more conftitutes the burlefque, than an empty pomp and dignity of words, where everything elfe is mean and low, can entitle any performance to the appellation of the true fublime. And I apprehend my Lord Shaftefbury's opinion of mere burlefque agrees with mine, when he afferts, There is no fuch thing to be found in the writings of the ancients. But perhaps I have lefs abhorrence than he profeffes for it; and that, not becaufe I have had fome little fuccefs on the ftage this way, but rather as it contributes more to exquifite mirth and laughter than any other; and thefe are probably more wholefome phyfic for the mind, and conduce better to purge away fpleen, melancholy, and ill affections, than is generally imagined. Nay, I will appeal to common obfervation, whether the fame companies are not found more full of good-humour and benevolence, after they have been fweetened for two or three hours with entertainments of this kind, than when foured by a tragedy or a grave lecture. But to illuftrate all this by another fcience, in which, perhaps, we fhall fee the diftinction more clearly and plainly, let us examine the works of a comic hiftory painter, with thofe performances which the Italians call Caricatura, where we fhall find the true excellence of the former to confift in the exacteft copying of nature; infomuch that a judicious eye inftantly rejects anything _outre_, any liberty which the painter hath taken with the features of that _alma mater_; whereas in the Caricatura we allow all licence--its aim is to exhibit monfters, not men; and all diftortions and exaggerations whatever are within its proper province. Now, what Caricatura is in painting, Burlefque is in writing; and in the fame manner the comic writer and painter correlate to each other. And here I fhall obferve, that, as in the former the painter feems to have the advantage; fo it is in the latter infinitely on the fide of the writer; for the Monftrous is much eafier to paint than defcribe, and the Ridiculous to defcribe than paint. And though perhaps this latter fpecies doth not in either fcience fo ftrongly affect and agitate the mufcles as the other; yet it will be owned, I believe, that a more rational and ufeful pleafure arifes to us from it. He who fhould call the ingenious Hogarth a burlefque painter, would, in my opinion, do him very little honour; for fure it is much eafier, much lefs the fubject of admiration, to paint a man with a nofe, or any other feature, of a prepofterous fize, or to expofe him in fome abfurd or monftrous attitude, than to exprefs the affections of men on canvas. It hath been thought a vaft commendation of a painter to fay his figures feem to breathe; but furely it is a much greater and nobler applaufe, that they appear to think. But to return. The Ridiculous only, as I have before faid, falls within my province in the prefent work. Nor will fome explanation of this word be thought impertinent by the reader, if he confiders how wonderfully it hath been miftaken, even by writers who have profeffed it: for to what but fuch a miftake can we attribute the many attempts to ridicule the blackeft villanies, and, what is yet worfe, the moft dreadful calamities? What could exceed the abfurdity of an author, who fhould write the comedy of Nero, with the merry incident of ripping up his mother's belly? or what would give a greater fhock to humanity than an attempt to expofe the miferies of poverty and diftrefs to ridicule? And yet the reader will not want much learning to fuggeft fuch inftances to himfelf. Befides, it may feem remarkable, that Ariftotle, who is fo fond and free of definitions, hath not thought proper to define the Ridiculous. Indeed, where he tells us it is proper to comedy, he hath remarked that villany is not its object: but he hath not, as I remember, pofitively afferted what is. Nor doth the Abbe Bellegarde, who hath written a treatife on this fubject, though he fhows us many fpecies of it, once trace it to its fountain. The only fource of the true Ridiculous (as it appears to me) is affectation. But though it arifes from one fpring only, when we confider the infinite ftreams into which this one branches, we fhall prefently ceafe to admire at the copious field it affords to an obferver. Now, affectation proceeds from one of thefe two caufes, vanity or hypocrify: for as vanity puts us on affecting falfe characters, in order to purchafe applaufe; fo hypocrify fets us on an endeavour to avoid cenfure, by concealing our vices under an appearance of their oppofite virtues. And though thefe two caufes are often confounded (for there is fome difficulty in diftinguifhing them), yet, as they proceed from very different motives, fo they are as clearly diftinct in their operations: for indeed, the affectation which arifes from vanity is nearer to truth than the other, as it hath not that violent repugnancy of nature to ftruggle with, which that of the hypocrite hath. It may be likewife noted, that affectation doth not imply an abfolute negation of thofe qualities which are affected; and, therefore, though, when it proceeds from hypocrify, it be nearly allied to deceit; yet when it comes from vanity only, it partakes of the nature of oftentation: for inftance, the affectation of liberality in a vain man differs vifibly from the fame affectation in the avaricious; for though the vain man is not what he would appear, or hath not the virtue he affects, to the degree he would be thought to have it; yet it fits lefs awkwardly on him than on the avaricious man, who is the very reverfe of what he would feem to be. From the difcovery of this affectation arifes the Ridiculous, which always ftrikes the reader with furprize and pleafure; and that in a higher and ftronger degree when the affectation arifes from hypocrify, than when from vanity; for to difcover any one to be the exact reverfe of what he affects, is more furprizing, and confequently more ridiculous, than to find him a little deficient in the quality he defires the reputation of. I might obferve that our Ben Jonfon, who of all men underftood the Ridiculous the beft, hath chiefly ufed the hypocritical affectation. Now, from affectation only, the miffortunes and calamities of life, or the imperfections of nature, may become the objects of ridicule. Surely he hath a very ill-framed mind who can look on uglinefs, infirmity, or poverty, as ridiculous in themfelves: nor do I believe any man living, who meets a dirty fellow riding through the ftreets in a cart, is ftruck with an idea of the Ridiculous from it; but if he fhould fee the fame figure defcend from his coach and fix, or bolt from his chair with his hat under his arm, he would then begin to laugh, and with juftice. In the fame manner, were we to enter a poor houfe and behold a wretched family fhivering with cold and languifhing with hunger, it would not incline us to laughter (at leaft we muft have very diabolical natures if it would); but fhould we difcover there a grate, inftead of coals, adorned with flowers, empty plate or china difhes on the fideboard, or any other affectation of riches and finery, either on their perfons or in their furniture, we might then indeed be excufed for ridiculing fo fantaftical an appearance. Much lefs are natural imperfections the object of derifion; but when uglinefs aims at the applaufe of beauty, or lamenefs endeavours to difplay agility, it is then that thefe unfortunate circumftances, which at firft moved our compaffion, tend only to raife our mirth. The poet carries this very far:-- None are for being what they are in fault, But for not being what they would be thought. Where if the metre would fuffer the word Ridiculous to clofe the firft line, the thought would be rather more proper. Great vices are the proper objects of our deteftation, fmaller faults, of our pity; but affectation appears to me the only true fource of the Ridiculous. But perhaps it may be objected to me, that I have againft my own rules introduced vices, and of a very black kind, into this work. To which I fhall anfwer: firft, that it is very difficult to purfue a feries of human actions, and keep clear from them. Secondly, that the vices to be found here are rather the accidental confequences of fome human frailty or foible, than caufes habitually exifting in the mind. Thirdly, that they are never fet forth as the objects of ridicule, but deteftation. Fourthly, that they are never the principal figure at that time on the fcene: and, laftly, they never produce the intended evil. Having thus diftinguifhed Jofeph Andrews from the productions of romance writers on the one hand and burlefque writers on the other, and given fome few very fhort hints (for I intended no more) of this fpecies of writing, which I have affirmed to be hitherto unattempted in our language; I fhall leave to my good-natured reader to apply my piece to my obfervations, and will detain him no longer than with a word concerning the characters in this work. And here I folemnly proteft I have no intention to vilify or afperfe any one; for though everything is copied from the book of nature, and fcarce a character or action produced which I have not taken from my I own obfervations and experience; yet I have ufed the utmoft care to obfcure the perfons by fuch different circumftances, degrees, and colours, that it will be impoffible to guefs at them with any degree of certainty; and if it ever happens otherwife, it is only where the failure characterized is fo minute, that it is a foible only which the party himfelf may laugh at as well as any other. As to the character of Adams, as it is the moft glaring in the whole, fo I conceive it is not to be found in any book now extant. It is defigned a character of perfect fimplicity; and as the goodnefs of his heart will recommend him to the good-natured, fo I hope it will excufe me to the gentlemen of his cloth; for whom, while they are worthy of their facred order, no man can poffibly have a greater refpect. They will therefore excufe me, notwithftanding the low adventures in which he is engaged, that I have made him a clergyman; fince no other office could have given him fo many opportunities of difplaying his worthy inclinations. THE HISTORY OF THE ADVENTURES OF JOSEPH ANDREWS AND HIS FRIEND MR ABRAHAM ADAMS BOOK I. CHAPTER I. _Of writing lives in general, and particularly of Pamela; with a word by the bye of Colley Cibber and others._ It is a trite but true obfervation, that examples work more forcibly on the mind than precepts: and if this be juft in what is odious and blameable, it is more ftrongly fo in what is amiable and praifeworthy. Here emulation moft effectually operates upon us, and infpires our imitation in an irrefiftible manner. A good man therefore is a ftanding leffon to all his acquaintance, and of far greater ufe in that narrow circle than a good book. But as it often happens that the beft men are but little known, and confequently cannot extend the ufefulnefs of their examples a great way; the writer may be called in aid to fpread their hiftory farther, and to prefent the amiable pictures to thofe who have not the happinefs of knowing the originals; and fo, by communicating fuch valuable patterns to the world, he may perhaps do a more extenfive fervice to mankind than the perfon whofe life originally afforded the pattern. In this light I have always regarded thofe biographers who have recorded the actions of great and worthy perfons of both fexes. Not to mention thofe antient writers which of late days are little read, being written in obfolete, and as they are generally thought, unintelligible languages, fuch as Plutarch, Nepos, and others which I heard of in my youth; our own language affords many of excellent ufe and inftruction, finely calculated to fow the feeds of virtue in youth, and very eafy to be comprehended by perfons of moderate capacity. Such as the hiftory of John the Great, who, by his brave and heroic actions againft men of large and athletic bodies, obtained the glorious appellation of the Giant-killer; that of an Earl of Warwick, whofe Chriftian name was Guy; the lives of Argalus and Parthenia; and above all, the hiftory of thofe feven worthy perfonages, the Champions of Chriftendom. In all thefe delight is mixed with inftruction, and the reader is almoft as much improved as entertained. But I pafs by thefe and many others to mention two books lately publifhed, which reprefent an admirable pattern of the amiable in either fex. The former of thefe, which deals in male virtue, was written by the great perfon himfelf, who lived the life he hath recorded, and is by many thought to have lived fuch a life only in order to write it. The other is communicated to us by an hiftorian who borrows his lights, as the common method is, from authentic papers and records. The reader, I believe, already conjectures, I mean the lives of Mr Colley Cibber and of Mrs Pamela Andrews. How artfully doth the former, by infinuating that he efcaped being promoted to the higheft ftations in Church and State, teach us a contempt of worldly grandeur! how ftrongly doth he inculcate an abfolute fubmiffion to our fuperiors! Laftly, how completely doth he arm us againft fo uneafy, fo wretched a paffion as the fear of fhame! how clearly doth he expofe the emptinefs and vanity of that phantom, reputation! What the female readers are taught by the memoirs of Mrs Andrews is fo well fet forth in the excellent effays or letters prefixed to the fecond and fubfequent editions of that work, that it would be here a needlefs repetition. The authentic hiftory with which I now prefent the public is an inftance of the great good that book is likely to do, and of the prevalence of example which I have juft obferved: fince it will appear that it was by keeping the excellent pattern of his fifter's virtues before his eyes, that Mr Jofeph Andrews was chiefly enabled to preferve his purity in the midft of fuch great temptations. I fhall only add that this character of male chaftity, though doubtlefs as defirable and becoming in one part of the human fpecies as in the other, is almoft the only virtue which the great apologift hath not given himfelf for the fake of giving the example to his readers. CHAPTER II. _Of Mr Jofeph Andrews, his birth, parentage, education, and great endowments; with a word or two concerning anceftors._ Mr Jofeph Andrews, the hero of our enfuing hiftory, was efteemed to be the only fon of Gaffar and Gammer Andrews, and brother to the illuftrious Pamela, whofe virtue is at prefent fo famous. As to his anceftors, we have fearched with great diligence, but little fuccefs; being unable to trace them farther than his great-grandfather, who, as an elderly perfon in the parifh remembers to have heard his father fay, was an excellent cudgel-player. Whether he had any anceftors before this, we muft leave to the opinion of our curious reader, finding nothing of fufficient certainty to rely on. However, we cannot omit inferting an epitaph which an ingenious friend of ours hath communicated:-- Stay, traveller, for underneath this pew Lies faft afleep that merry man Andrew: When the laft day's great fun fhall gild the fkies, Then he fhall from his tomb get up and rife. Be merry while thou canft: for furely thou Shalt fhortly be as fad as he is now. The words are almoft out of the ftone with antiquity. But it is needlefs to obferve that Andrew here is writ without an _s_, and is, befides, a Chriftian name. My friend, moreover, conjectures this to have been the founder of that fect of laughing philofophers fince called Merry-andrews. To waive, therefore, a circumftance which, though mentioned in conformity to the exact rules of biography, is not greatly material, I proceed to things of more confequence. Indeed, it is fufficiently certain that he had as many anceftors as the beft man living, and, perhaps, if we look five or fix hundred years backwards, might be related to fome perfons of very great figure at prefent, whofe anceftors within half the laft century are buried in as great obfcurity. But fuppofe, for argument's fake, we fhould admit that he had no anceftors at all, but had fprung up, according to the modern phrafe, out of a dunghill, as the Athenians pretended they themfelves did from the earth, would not this autokopros[A] have been juftly entitled to all the praife arifing from his own virtues? Would it not be hard that a man who hath no anceftors fhould therefore be rendered incapable of acquiring honour; when we fee fo many who have no virtues enjoying the honour of their forefathers? At ten years old (by which time his education was advanced to writing and reading) he was bound an apprentice, according to the ftatute, to Sir Thomas Booby, an uncle of Mr Booby's by the father's fide. Sir Thomas having then an eftate in his own hands, the young Andrews was at firft employed in what in the country they call keeping birds. His office was to perform the part the ancients affigned to the god Priapus, which deity the moderns call by the name of Jack o' Lent; but his voice being fo extremely mufical, that it rather allured the birds than terrified them, he was foon tranfplanted from the fields into the dog-kennel, where he was placed under the huntfman, and made what the fportfmen term whipper-in. For this place likewife the fweetnefs of his voice difqualified him; the dogs preferring the melody of his chiding to all the alluring notes of the huntfman, who foon became fo incenfed at it, that he defired Sir Thomas to provide otherwife for him, and conftantly laid every fault the dogs were at to the account of the poor boy, who was now tranfplanted to the ftable. Here he foon gave proofs of ftrength and agility beyond his years, and conftantly rode the moft fpirited and vicious horfes to water, with an intrepidity which furprized every one. While he was in this ftation, he rode feveral races for Sir Thomas, and this with fuch expertnefs and fuccefs, that the neighbouring gentlemen frequently folicited the knight to permit little Joey (for fo he was called) to ride their matches. The beft gamefters, before they laid their money, always inquired which horfe little Joey was to ride; and the bets were rather proportioned by the rider than by the horfe himfelf; efpecially after he had fcornfully refufed a confiderable bribe to play booty on fuch an occafion. This extremely raifed his character, and fo pleafed the Lady Booby, that fhe defired to have him (being now feventeen years of age) for her own footboy. [A] In Englifh, fprung from a dunghill. Joey was now preferred from the ftable to attend on his lady, to go on her errands, ftand behind her chair, wait at her tea-table, and carry her prayer-book to church; at which place his voice gave him an opportunity of diftinguifhing himfelf by finging pfalms: he behaved likewife in every other refpect fo well at Divine fervice, that it recommended him to the notice of Mr Abraham Adams, the curate, who took an opportunity one day, as he was drinking a cup of ale in Sir Thomas's kitchen, to afk the young man feveral queftions concerning religion; with his anfwers to which he was wonderfully pleafed. CHAPTER III. _Of Mr Abraham Adams the curate, Mrs Slipflop the chambermaid, and others._ Mr Abraham Adams was an excellent fcholar. He was a perfect mafter of the Greek and Latin languages; to which he added a great fhare of knowledge in the Oriental tongues; and could read and tranflate French, Italian, and Spanifh. He had applied many years to the moft fevere ftudy, and had treafured up a fund of learning rarely to be met with in a univerfity. He was, befides, a man of good fenfe, good parts, and good nature; but was at the fame time as entirely ignorant of the ways of this world as an infant juft entered into it could poffibly be. As he had never any intention to deceive, fo he never fufpected fuch a defign in others. He was generous, friendly, and brave to an excefs; but fimplicity was his characteriftick: he did, no more than Mr Colley Cibber, apprehend any fuch paffions as malice and envy to exift in mankind; which was indeed lefs remarkable in a country parfon than in a gentleman who hath paffed his life behind the fcenes,--a place which hath been feldom thought the fchool of innocence, and where a very little obfervation would have convinced the great apologift that thofe paffions have a real exiftence in the human mind. His virtue, and his other qualifications, as they rendered him equal to his office, fo they made him an agreeable and valuable companion, and had fo much endeared and well recommended him to a bifhop, that at the age of fifty he was provided with a handfome income of twenty-three pounds a year; which, however, he could not make any great figure with, becaufe he lived in a dear country, and was a little encumbered with a wife and fix children. It was this gentleman, who having, as I have faid, obferved the fingular devotion of young Andrews, had found means to queftion him concerning feveral particulars; as, how many books there were in the New Teftament? which were they? how many chapters they contained? and fuch like: to all which, Mr Adams privately faid, he anfwered much better than Sir Thomas, or two other neighbouring juftices of the peace could probably have done. Mr Adams was wonderfully folicitous to know at what time, and by what opportunity, the youth became acquainted with thefe matters: Joey told him that he had very early learnt to read and write by the goodnefs of his father, who, though he had not intereft enough to get him into a charity fchool, becaufe a coufin of his father's landlord did not vote on the right fide for a churchwarden in a borough town, yet had been himfelf at the expenfe of fixpence a week for his learning. He told him likewife, that ever fince he was in Sir Thomas's family he had employed all his hours of leifure in reading good books; that he had read the Bible, the Whole Duty of Man, and Thomas a Kempis; and that as often as he could, without being perceived, he had ftudied a great good book which lay open in the hall window, where he had read, "as how the devil carried away half a church in fermon-time, without hurting one of the congregation; and as how a field of corn ran away down a hill with all the trees upon it, and covered another man's meadow." This fufficiently affured Mr Adams that the good book meant could be no other than Baker's Chronicle. The curate, furprized to find fuch inftances of induftry and application in a young man who had never met with the leaft encouragement, afked him, If he did not extremely regret the want of a liberal education, and the not having been born of parents who might have indulged his talents and defire of knowledge? To which he anfwered, "He hoped he had profited fomewhat better from the books he had read than to lament his condition in this world. That, for his part, he was perfectly content with the ftate to which he was called; that he fhould endeavour to improve his talent, which was all required of him; but not repine at his own lot, nor envy thofe of his betters." "Well faid, my lad," replied the curate; "and I wifh fome who have read many more good books, nay, and fome who have written good books themfelves, had profited fo much by them." Adams had no nearer accefs to Sir Thomas or my lady than through the waiting-gentlewoman; for Sir Thomas was too apt to eftimate men merely by their drefs or fortune; and my lady was a woman of gaiety, who had been bleft with a town education, and never fpoke of any of her country neighbours by any other appellation than that of the brutes. They both regarded the curate as a kind of domeftic only, belonging to the parfon of the parifh, who was at this time at variance with the knight; for the parfon had for many years lived in a conftant ftate of civil war, or, which is perhaps as bad, of civil law, with Sir Thomas himfelf and the tenants of his manor. The foundation of this quarrel was a modus, by fetting which afide an advantage of feveral fhillings _per annum_ would have accrued to the rector; but he had not yet been able to accomplifh his purpofe, and had reaped hitherto nothing better from the fuits than the pleafure (which he ufed indeed frequently to fay was no fmall one) of reflecting that he had utterly undone many of the poor tenants, though he had at the fame time greatly impoverifhed himfelf. Mrs Slipflop, the waiting-gentlewoman, being herfelf the daughter of a curate, preferved fome refpect for Adams: fhe profeffed great regard for his learning, and would frequently difpute with him on points of theology; but always infifted on a deference to be paid to her underftanding, as fhe had been frequently at London, and knew more of the world than a country parfon could pretend to. She had in thefe difputes a particular advantage over Adams: for fhe was a mighty affecter of hard words, which fhe ufed in fuch a manner that the parfon, who durft not offend her by calling her words in queftion, was frequently at fome lofs to guefs her meaning, and would have been much lefs puzzled by an Arabian manufcript. Adams therefore took an opportunity one day, after a pretty long difcourfe with her on the effence (or, as fhe pleafed to term it, the incence) of matter, to mention the cafe of young Andrews; defiring her to recommend him to her lady as a youth very fufceptible of learning, and one whofe inftruction in Latin he would himfelf undertake; by which means he might be qualified for a higher ftation than that of a footman; and added, fhe knew it was in his mafter's power eafily to provide for him in a better manner. He therefore defired that the boy might be left behind under his care. "La! Mr Adams," faid Mrs Slipflop, "do you think my lady will fuffer any preambles about any fuch matter? She is going to London very concifely, and I am confidous would not leave Joey behind her on any account; for he is one of the genteeleft young fellows you may fee in a fummer's day; and I am confidous fhe would as foon think of parting with a pair of her grey mares, for fhe values herfelf as much on one as the other." Adams would have interrupted, but fhe proceeded: "And why is Latin more neceffitous for a footman than a gentleman? It is very proper that you clergymen muft learn it, becaufe you can't preach without it: but I have heard gentlemen fay in London, that it is fit for nobody elfe. I am confidous my lady would be angry with me for mentioning it; and I fhall draw myfelf into no fuch delemy." At which words her lady's bell rung, and Mr Adams was forced to retire; nor could he gain a fecond opportunity with her before their London journey, which happened a few days afterwards. However, Andrews behaved very thankfully and gratefully to him for his intended kindnefs, which he told him he never would forget, and at the fame time received from the good man many admonitions concerning the regulation of his future conduct, and his perfeverance in innocence and induftry. CHAPTER IV. _What happened after their journey to London._ No fooner was young Andrews arrived at London than he began to fcrape an acquaintance with his party-coloured brethren, who endeavoured to make him defpife his former courfe of life. His hair was cut after the neweft fafhion, and became his chief care; he went abroad with it all the morning in papers, and dreft it out in the afternoon. They could not, however, teach him to game, fwear, drink, nor any other genteel vice the town abounded with. He applied moft of his leifure hours to mufic, in which he greatly improved himfelf; and became fo perfect a connoiffeur in that art, that he led the opinion of all the other footmen at an opera, and they never condemned or applauded a fingle fong contrary to his approbation or diflike. He was a little too forward in riots at the play-houfes and affemblies; and when he attended his lady at church (which was but feldom) he behaved with lefs feeming devotion than formerly: however, if he was outwardly a pretty fellow, his morals remained entirely uncorrupted, though he was at the fame time fmarter and genteeler than any of the beaus in town, either in or out of livery. His lady, who had often faid of him that Joey was the handfomeft and genteeleft footman in the kingdom, but that it was pity he wanted fpirit, began now to find that fault no longer; on the contrary, fhe was frequently heard to cry out, "Ay, there is fome life in this fellow." She plainly faw the effects which the town air hath on the fobereft conftitutions. She would now walk out with him into Hyde Park in a morning, and when tired, which happened almoft every minute, would lean on his arm, and converfe with him in great familiarity. Whenever fhe ftept out of her coach, fhe would take him by the hand, and fometimes, for fear of ftumbling, prefs it very hard; fhe admitted him to deliver meffages at her bedfide in a morning, leered at him at table, and indulged him in all thofe innocent freedoms which women of figure may permit without the leaft fully of their virtue. But though their virtue remains unfullied, yet now and then fome fmall arrows will glance on the fhadow of it, their reputation; and fo it fell out to Lady Booby, who happened to be walking arm-in-arm with Joey one morning in Hyde Park, when Lady Tittle and Lady Tattle came accidentally by in their coach. "Blefs me," fays Lady Tittle, "can I believe my eyes? Is that Lady Booby?"--"Surely," fays Tattle. "But what makes you furprized?"--"Why, is not that her footman?" replied Tittle. At which Tattle laughed, and cried, "An old bufinefs, I affure you: is it poffible you fhould not have heard it? The whole town hath known it this half-year." The confequence of this interview was a whifper through a hundred vifits, which were feparately performed by the two ladies[A] the fame afternoon, and might have had a mifchievous effect, had it not been ftopt by two frefh reputations which were publifhed the day afterwards, and engroffed the whole talk of the town. [A] It may feem an abfurdity that Tattle fhould vifit, as fhe actually did, to fpread a known fcandal: but the reader may reconcile this by fuppofing, with me, that, notwithftanding what fhe fays, this was her firft acquaintance with it. But, whatever opinion or fufpicion the fcandalous inclination of defamers might entertain of Lady Booby's innocent freedoms, it is certain they made no impreffion on young Andrews, who never offered to encroach beyond the liberties which his lady allowed him,--a behaviour which fhe imputed to the violent refpect he preferved for her, and which ferved only to heighten a fomething fhe began to conceive, and which the next chapter will open a little farther. CHAPTER V. _The death of Sir Thomas Booby, with the affectionate and mournful behaviour of his widow, and the great purity of Jofeph Andrews._ At this time an accident happened which put a ftop to thofe agreeable walks, which probably would have foon puffed up the cheeks of Fame, and caufed her to blow her brazen trumpet through the town; and this was no other than the death of Sir Thomas Booby, who, departing this life, left his difconfolate lady confined to her houfe, as clofely as if fhe herfelf had been attacked by fome violent difeafe. During the firft fix days the poor lady admitted none but Mrs. Slipflop, and three female friends, who made a party at cards: but on the feventh fhe ordered Joey, whom, for a good reafon, we fhall hereafter call JOSEPH, to bring up her tea-kettle. The lady being in bed, called Jofeph to her, bade him fit down, and, having accidentally laid her hand on his, fhe afked him if he had ever been in love. Jofeph anfwered, with fome confufion, it was time enough for one fo young as himfelf to think on fuch things. "As young as you are," replied the lady, "I am convinced you are no ftranger to that paffion. Come, Joey," fays fhe, "tell me truly, who is the happy girl whofe eyes have made a conqueft of you?" Jofeph returned, that all the women he had ever feen were equally indifferent to him. "Oh then," faid the lady, "you are a general lover. Indeed, you handfome fellows, like handfome women, are very long and difficult in fixing; but yet you fhall never perfuade me that your heart is fo infufceptible of affection; I rather impute what you fay to your fecrecy, a very commendable quality, and what I am far from being angry with you for. Nothing can be more unworthy in a young man, than to betray any intimacies with the ladies." "Ladies! madam," faid Jofeph, "I am fure I never had the impudence to think of any that deferve that name." "Don't pretend to too much modefty," faid fhe, "for that fometimes may be impertinent: but pray anfwer me this queftion. Suppofe a lady fhould happen to like you; fuppofe fhe fhould prefer you to all your fex, and admit you to the fame familiarities as you might have hoped for if you had been born her equal, are you certain that no vanity could tempt you to difcover her? Anfwer me honeftly, Jofeph; have you fo much more fenfe and fo much more virtue than you handfome young fellows generally have, who make no fcruple of facrificing our dear reputation to your pride, without confidering the great obligation we lay on you by our condefcenfion and confidence? Can you keep a fecret, my Joey?" "Madam," fays he, "I hope your ladyfhip can't tax me with ever betraying the fecrets of the family; and I hope, if you was to turn me away, I might have that character of you." "I don't intend to turn you away, Joey," faid fhe, and fighed; "I am afraid it is not in my power." She then raifed herfelf a little in her bed, and difcovered one of the whiteft necks that ever was feen; at which Jofeph blufhed. "La!" fays fhe, in an affected furprize, "what am I doing? I have trufted myfelf with a man alone, naked in bed; fuppofe you fhould have any wicked intentions upon my honour, how fhould I defend myfelf?" Jofeph protefted that he never had the leaft evil defign againft her. "No," fays fhe, "perhaps you may not call your defigns wicked; and perhaps they are not fo."--He fwore they were not. "You mifunderftand me," fays fhe; "I mean if they were againft my honour, they may not be wicked; but the world calls them fo. But then, fay you, the world will never know anything of the matter; yet would not that be trufting to your fecrecy? Muft not my reputation be then in your power? Would you not then be my mafter?" Jofeph begged her ladyfhip to be comforted; for that he would never imagine the leaft wicked thing againft her, and that he had rather die a thoufand deaths than give her any reafon to fufpect him. "Yes," faid fhe, "I muft have reafon to fufpect you. Are you not a man? and, without vanity, I may pretend to fome charms. But perhaps you may fear I fhould profecute you; indeed I hope you do; and yet Heaven knows I fhould never have the confidence to appear before a court of juftice; and you know, Joey, I am of a forgiving temper. Tell me, Joey, don't you think I fhould forgive you?"--"Indeed, madam," fays Jofeph, "I will never do anything to difoblige your ladyfhip."--"How," fays fhe, "do you think it would not difoblige me then? Do you think I would willingly fuffer you?"--"I don't underftand you, madam," fays Jofeph.--"Don't you?" faid fhe, "then you are either a fool, or pretend to be fo; I find I was miftaken in you. So get you downftairs, and never let me fee your face again; your pretended innocence cannot impofe on me."--"Madam," faid Jofeph, "I would not have your ladyfhip think any evil of me. I have always endeavoured to be a dutiful fervant both to you and my mafter."--"O thou villain!" anfwered my lady; "why didft thou mention the name of that dear man, unlefs to torment me, to bring his precious memory to my mind?" (and then fhe burft into a fit of tears.) "Get thee from my fight! I fhall never endure thee more." At which words fhe turned away from him; and Jofeph retreated from the room in a moft difconfolate condition, and writ that letter which the reader will find in the next chapter. CHAPTER VI. _How Jofeph Andrews writ a letter to his fifter Pamela._ "To MRS PAMELA ANDREWS, LIVING WITH SQUIRE BOOBY. "DEAR SISTER,--Since I received your letter of your good lady's death, we have had a miffortune of the fame kind in our family. My worthy mafter Sir Thomas died about four days ago; and, what is worfe, my poor lady is certainly gone diftracted. None of the fervants expected her to take it fo to heart, becaufe they quarrelled almoft every day of their lives: but no more of that, becaufe you know, Pamela, I never loved to tell the fecrets of my mafter's family; but to be fure you muft have known they never loved one another; and I have heard her ladyfhip wifh his honour dead above a thoufand times; but nobody knows what it is to lofe a friend till they have loft him. "Don't tell anybody what I write, becaufe I fhould not care to have folks fay I difcover what paffes in our family; but if it had not been fo great a lady, I fhould have thought fhe had had a mind to me. Dear Pamela, don't tell anybody; but fhe ordered me to fit down by her bedfide, when fhe was naked in bed; and fhe held my hand, and talked exactly as a lady does to her fweetheart in a ftage-play, which I have feen in Covent Garden, while fhe wanted him to be no better than he fhould be. "If madam be mad, I fhall not care for ftaying long in the family; fo I heartily wifh you could get me a place, either at the fquire's, or fome other neighbouring gentleman's, unlefs it be true that you are going to be married to parfon Williams, as folks talk, and then I fhould be very willing to be his clerk; for which you know I am qualified, being able to read and to fet a pfalm. "I fancy I fhall be difcharged very foon; and the moment I am, unlefs I hear from you, I fhall return to my old mafter's country-feat, if it be only to fee parfon Adams, who is the beft man in the world. London is a bad place, and there is fo little good fellowfhip, that the next-door neighbours don't know one another. Pray give my fervice to all friends that inquire for me. So I reft "Your loving brother, "JOSEPH ANDREWS." As foon as Jofeph had fealed and directed this letter he walked downftairs, where he met Mrs. Slipflop, with whom we fhall take this opportunity to bring the reader a little better acquainted. She was a maiden gentlewoman of about forty-five years of age, who, having made a fmall flip in her youth, had continued a good maid ever fince. She was not at this time remarkably handfome; being very fhort, and rather too corpulent in body, and fomewhat red, with the addition of pimples in the face. Her nofe was likewife rather too large, and her eyes too little; nor did fhe refemble a cow fo much in her breath as in two brown globes which fhe carried before her; one of her legs was alfo a little fhorter than the other, which occafioned her to limp as fhe walked. This fair creature had long caft the eyes of affection on Jofeph, in which fhe had not met with quite fo good fuccefs as fhe probably wifhed, though, befides the allurements of her native charms, fhe had given him tea, fweetmeats, wine, and many other delicacies, of which, by keeping the keys, fhe had the abfolute command. Jofeph, however, had not returned the leaft gratitude to all thefe favours, not even fo much as a kifs; though I would not infinuate fhe was fo eafily to be fatiffied; for furely then he would have been highly blameable. The truth is, fhe was arrived at an age when fhe thought fhe might indulge herfelf in any liberties with a man, without the danger of bringing a third perfon into the world to betray them. She imagined that by fo long a felf-denial fhe had not only made amends for the fmall flip of her youth above hinted at, but had likewife laid up a quantity of merit to excufe any future failings. In a word, fhe refolved to give a loofe to her amorous inclinations, and to pay off the debt of pleafure which fhe found fhe owed herfelf, as faft as poffible. With thefe charms of perfon, and in this difpofition of mind, fhe encountered poor Jofeph at the bottom of the ftairs, and afked him if he would drink a glafs of fomething good this morning. Jofeph, whofe fpirits were not a little caft down, very readily and thankfully accepted the offer; and together they went into a clofet, where, having delivered him a full glafs of ratafia, and defired him to fit down, Mrs. Slipflop thus began:-- "Sure nothing can be a more fimple contract in a woman than to place her affections on a boy. If I had ever thought it would have been my fate, I fhould have wifhed to die a thoufand deaths rather than live to fee that day. If we like a man, the lighteft hint fophifticates. Whereas a boy propofes upon us to break through all the regulations of modefty, before we can make any oppreffion upon him." Jofeph, who did not underftand a word fhe faid, anfwered, "Yes, madam."--"Yes, madam!" replied Mrs. Slipflop with fome warmth, "Do you intend to refult my paffion? Is it not enough, ungrateful as you are, to make no return to all the favours I have done you; but you muft treat me with ironing? Barbarous monfter! how have I deferved that my paffion fhould be refulted and treated with ironing?" "Madam," anfwered Jofeph, "I don't underftand your hard words; but I am certain you have no occafion to call me ungrateful, for, fo far from intending you any wrong, I have always loved you as well as if you had been my own mother." "How, firrah!" fays Mrs. Slipflop in a rage; "your own mother? Do you affinuate that I am old enough to be your mother? I don't know what a ftripling may think, but I believe a man would refer me to any green-ficknefs filly girl whatfomdever: but I ought to defpife you rather than be angry with you, for referring the converfation of girls to that of a woman of fenfe."--"Madam," fays Jofeph, "I am fure I have always valued the honour you did me by your converfation, for I know you are a woman of learning."--"Yes, but, Jofeph," faid fhe, a little foftened by the compliment to her learning, "if you had a value for me, you certainly would have found fome method of fhowing it me; for I am convicted you muft fee the value I have for you. Yes, Jofeph, my eyes, whether I would or no, muft have declared a paffion I cannot conquer.--Oh! Jofeph!" As when a hungry tigrefs, who long has traverfed the woods in fruitlefs fearch, fees within the reach of her claws a lamb, fhe prepares to leap on her prey; or as a voracious pike, of immenfe fize, furveys through the liquid element a roach or gudgeon, which cannot efcape her jaws, opens them wide to fwallow the little fifh; fo did Mrs. Slipflop prepare to lay her violent amorous hands on the poor Jofeph, when luckily her miftrefs's bell rung, and delivered the intended martyr from her clutches. She was obliged to leave him abruptly, and to defer the execution of her purpofe till fome other time. We fhall therefore return to the Lady Booby, and give our reader fome account of her behaviour, after fhe was left by Jofeph in a temper of mind not greatly different from that of the inflamed Slipflop. CHAPTER VII. _Sayings of wife men. A dialogue between the lady and her maid; and a panegyric, or rather fatire, on the paffion of love, in the fublime ftyle._ It is the obfervation of fome antient fage, whofe name I have forgot, that paffions operate differently on the human mind, as difeafes on the body, in proportion to the ftrength or weaknefs, foundnefs or rottennefs, of the one and the other. We hope, therefore, a judicious reader will give himfelf fome pains to obferve, what we have fo greatly laboured to defcribe, the different operations of this paffion of love in the gentle and cultivated mind of the Lady Booby, from thofe which it effected in the lefs polifhed and coarfer difpofition of Mrs Slipflop. Another philofopher, whofe name alfo at prefent efcapes my memory, hath fomewhere faid, that refolutions taken in the abfence of the beloved object are very apt to vanifh in its prefence; on both which wife fayings the following chapter may ferve as a comment. No fooner had Jofeph left the room in the manner we have before related than the lady, enraged at her difappointment, began to reflect with feverity on her conduct. Her love was now changed to difdain, which pride affifted to torment her. She defpifed herfelf for the meannefs of her paffion, and Jofeph for its ill fuccefs. However, fhe had now got the better of it in her own opinion, and determined immediately to difmifs the object. After much toffing and turning in her bed, and many foliloquies, which if we had no better matter for our reader we would give him, fhe at laft rung the bell as above mentioned, and was prefently attended by Mrs Slipflop, who was not much better pleafed with Jofeph than the lady herfelf. "Slipflop," faid Lady Booby, "when did you fee Jofeph?" The poor woman was fo furprized at the unexpected found of his name at fo critical a time, that fhe had the greateft difficulty to conceal the confufion fhe was under from her miftrefs; whom fhe anfwered, neverthelefs, with pretty good confidence, though not entirely void of fear of fufpicion, that fhe had not feen him that morning. "I am afraid," faid Lady Booby, "he is a wild young fellow."--"That he is," faid Slipflop, "and a wicked one too. To my knowledge he games, drinks, fwears, and fights eternally; befides, he is horribly indicted to wenching."--"Ay!" faid the lady, "I never heard that of him."--"O madam!" anfwered the other, "he is fo lewd a rafcal, that if your ladyfhip keeps him much longer, you will not have one virgin in your houfe except myfelf. And yet I can't conceive what the wenches fee in him, to be fo foolifhly fond as they are; in my eyes, he is as ugly a fcarecrow as I ever upheld."--"Nay," faid the lady, "the boy is well enough."--"La! ma'am," cries Slipflop, "I think him the ragmaticalleft fellow in the family."--"Sure, Slipflop," fays fhe, "you are miftaken: but which of the women do you moft fufpect?"--"Madam," fays Slipflop, "there is Betty the chambermaid, I am almoft convicted, is with child by him."--"Ay!" fays the lady, "then pray pay her her wages inftantly. I will keep no fuch fluts in my family. And as for Jofeph, you may difcard him too."--"Would your ladyfhip have him paid off immediately?" cries Slipflop, "for perhaps, when Betty is gone he may mend: and really the boy is a good fervant, and a ftrong healthy lufcious boy enough."-- "This morning," anfwered the lady with fome vehemence. "I wifh, madam," cries Slipflop, "your ladyfhip would be fo good as to try him a little longer."--"I will not have my commands difputed," faid the lady; "fure you are not fond of him yourfelf?"--"I, madam!" cries Slipflop, reddening, if not blufhing, "I fhould be forry to think your ladyfhip had any reafon to refpect me of fondnefs for a fellow; and if it be your pleafure, I fhall fulfil it with as much reluctance as poffible."--"As little, I fuppofe you mean," faid the lady; "and fo about it inftantly." Mrs. Slipflop went out, and the lady had fcarce taken two turns before fhe fell to knocking and ringing with great violence. Slipflop, who did not travel poft hafte, foon returned, and was countermanded as to Jofeph, but ordered to fend Betty about her bufinefs without delay. She went out a fecond time with much greater alacrity than before; when the lady began immediately to accufe herfelf of want of refolution, and to apprehend the return of her affection, with its pernicious confequences; fhe therefore applied herfelf again to the bell, and re-fummoned Mrs. Slipflop into her prefence; who again returned, and was told by her miftrefs that fhe had confidered better of the matter, and was abfolutely refolved to turn away Jofeph; which fhe ordered her to do immediately. Slipflop, who knew the violence of her lady's temper, and would not venture her place for any Adonis or Hercules in the univerfe, left her a third time; which fhe had no fooner done, than the little god Cupid, fearing he had not yet done the lady's bufinefs, took a frefh arrow with the fharpeft point out of his quiver, and fhot it directly into her heart; in other and plainer language, the lady's paffion got the better of her reafon. She called back Slipflop once more, and told her fhe had refolved to fee the boy, and examine him herfelf; therefore bid her fend him up. This wavering in her miftrefs's temper probably put fomething into the waiting-gentlewoman's head not neceffary to mention to the fagacious reader. Lady Booby was going to call her back again, but could not prevail with herfelf. The next confideration therefore was, how fhe fhould behave to Jofeph when he came in. She refolved to preferve all the dignity of the woman of fafhion to her fervant, and to indulge herfelf in this laft view of Jofeph (for that fhe was moft certainly refolved it fhould be) at his own expenfe, by firft infulting and then difcarding him. O Love, what monftrous tricks doft thou play with thy votaries of both fexes! How doft thou deceive them, and make them deceive themfelves! Their follies are thy delight! Their fighs make thee laugh, and their pangs are thy merriment! Not the great Rich, who turns men into monkeys, wheel-barrows, and whatever elfe beft humours his fancy, hath fo ftrangely metamorphofed the human fhape; nor the great Cibber, who confounds all number, gender, and breaks through every rule of grammar at his will, hath fo diftorted the Englifh language as thou doft metamorphofe and diftort the human fenfes. Thou putteft out our eyes, ftoppeft up our ears, and takeft away the power of our noftrils; fo that we can neither fee the largeft object, hear the loudeft noife, nor fmell the moft poignant perfume. Again, when thou pleafeft, thou canft make a molehill appear as a mountain, a Jew's-harp found like a trumpet, and a daify fmell like a violet. Thou canft make cowardice brave, avarice generous, pride humble, and cruelty tender-hearted. In fhort, thou turneft the heart of man infide out, as a juggler doth a petticoat, and bringeft whatfoever pleafeth thee out from it. If there be any one who doubts all this, let him read the next chapter. CHAPTER VIII. _In which, after fome very fine writing, the hiftory goes on, and relates the interview between the lady and Jofeph; where the latter hath fet an example which we defpair of feeing followed by his fex in this vicious age._ Now the rake Hefperus had called for his breeches, and, having well rubbed his drowfy eyes, prepared to drefs himfelf for all night; by whofe example his brother rakes on earth likewife leave thofe beds in which they had flept away the day. Now Thetis, the good houfewife, began to put on the pot, in order to regale the good man Phoebus after his daily labours were over. In vulgar language, it was in the evening when Jofeph attended his lady's orders. But as it becomes us to preferve the character of this lady, who is the heroine of our tale; and as we have naturally a wonderful tendernefs for that beautiful part of the human fpecies called the fair fex; before we difcover too much of her frailty to our reader, it will be proper to give him a lively idea of the vaft temptation, which overcame all the efforts of a modeft and virtuous mind; and then we humbly hope his good nature will rather pity than condemn the imperfection of human virtue. [Illuftration] Nay, the ladies themfelves will, we hope, be induced, by confidering the uncommon variety of charms which united in this young man's perfon, to bridle their rampant paffion for chaftity, and be at leaft as mild as their violent modefty and virtue will permit them, in cenfuring the conduct of a woman who, perhaps, was in her own difpofition as chafte as thofe pure and fanctified virgins who, after a life innocently fpent in the gaieties of the town, begin about fifty to attend twice _per diem_ at the polite churches and chapels, to return thanks for the grace which preferved them formerly amongft beaus from temptations perhaps lefs powerful than what now attacked the Lady Booby. Mr Jofeph Andrews was now in the one-and-twentieth year of his age. He was of the higheft degree of middle ftature; his limbs were put together with great elegance, and no lefs ftrength; his legs and thighs were formed in the exacteft proportion; his fhoulders were broad and brawny, but yet his arm hung fo eafily, that he had all the fymptoms of ftrength without the leaft clumfinefs. His hair was of a nut-brown colour, and was difplayed in wanton ringlets down his back; his forehead was high, his eyes dark, and as full of fweetnefs as of fire; his nofe a little inclined to the Roman; his teeth white and even; his lips full, red, and foft; his beard was only rough on his chin and upper lip; but his cheeks, in which his blood glowed, were overfpread with a thick down; his countenance had a tendernefs joined with a fenfibility inexpreffible. Add to this the moft perfect neatnefs in his drefs, and an air which, to thofe who have not feen many noblemen, would give an idea of nobility. Such was the perfon who now appeared before the lady. She viewed him fome time in filence, and twice or thrice before fhe fpake changed her mind as to the manner in which fhe fhould begin. At length fhe faid to him, "Jofeph, I am forry to hear fuch complaints againft you: I am told you behave fo rudely to the maids, that they cannot do their bufinefs in quiet; I mean thofe who are not wicked enough to hearken to your folicitations. As to others, they may, perhaps, not call you rude; for there are wicked fluts who make one afhamed of one's own fex, and are as ready to admit any naufeous familiarity as fellows to offer it: nay, there are fuch in my family, but they fhall not ftay in it; that impudent trollop who is with child by you is difcharged by this time." As a perfon who is ftruck through the heart with a thunderbolt looks extremely furprifed, nay, and perhaps is fo too--thus the poor Jofeph received the falfe accufation of his miftrefs; he blufhed and looked confounded, which fhe mifinterpreted to be fymptoms of his guilt, and thus went on:-- "Come hither, Jofeph: another miftrefs might difcard you for thefe offences; but I have a compaffion for your youth, and if I could be certain you would be no more guilty--Confider, child," laying her hand careleffly upon his, "you are a handfome young fellow, and might do better; you might make your fortune." "Madam," faid Jofeph, "I do affure your ladyfhip I don't know whether any maid in the houfe is man or woman." "Oh fie! Jofeph," anfwered the lady, "don't commit another crime in denying the truth. I could pardon the firft; but I hate a lyar." "Madam," cries Jofeph, "I hope your ladyfhip will not be offended at my afferting my innocence; for, by all that is facred, I have never offered more than kiffing." "Kiffing!" faid the lady, with great difcompofure of countenance, and more rednefs in her cheeks than anger in her eyes; "do you call that no crime? Kiffing, Jofeph, is as a prologue to a play. Can I believe a young fellow of your age and complexion will be content with kiffing? No, Jofeph, there is no woman who grants that but will grant more; and I am deceived greatly in you if you would not put her clofely to it. What would you think, Jofeph, if I admitted you to kifs me?" Jofeph replied he would fooner die than have any fuch thought. "And yet, Jofeph," returned fhe, "ladies have admitted their footmen to fuch familiarities; and footmen, I confefs to you, much lefs deferving them; fellows without half your charms--for fuch might almoft excufe the crime. Tell me therefore, Jofeph, if I fhould admit you to fuch freedom, what would you think of me?--tell me freely." "Madam," faid Jofeph, "I fhould think your ladyfhip condefcended a great deal below yourfelf." "Pugh!" faid fhe; "that I am to anfwer to myfelf: but would not you infift on more? Would you be contented with a kifs? Would not your inclinations be all on fire rather by fuch a favour?" "Madam," faid Jofeph, "if they were, I hope I fhould be able to controul them, without fuffering them to get the better of my virtue." You have heard, reader, poets talk of the ftatue of Surprize; you have heard likewife, or elfe you have heard very little, how Surprize made one of the fons of Croefus fpeak, though he was dumb. You have feen the faces, in the eighteen-penny gallery, when, through the trap-door, to foft or no mufic, Mr. Bridgewater, Mr. William Mills, or fome other of ghoftly appearance, hath afcended, with a face all pale with powder, and a fhirt all bloody with ribbons;--but from none of thefe, nor from Phidias or Praxiteles, if they fhould return to life--no, not from the inimitable pencil of my friend Hogarth, could you receive fuch an idea of furprize as would have entered in at your eyes had they beheld the Lady Booby when thofe laft words iffued out from the lips of Jofeph. "Your virtue!" faid the lady, recovering after a filence of two minutes; "I fhall never furvive it. Your virtue!--intolerable confidence! Have you the affurance to pretend, that when a lady demeans herfelf to throw afide the rules of decency, in order to honour you with the higheft favour in her power, your virtue fhould refift her inclination? that, when fhe had conquered her own virtue, fhe fhould find an obftruction in yours?" "Madam," faid Jofeph, "I can't fee why her having no virtue fhould be a reafon againft my having any; or why, becaufe I am a man, or becaufe I am poor, my virtue muft be fubfervient to her pleafures." "I am out of patience," cries the lady: "did ever mortal hear of a man's virtue? Did ever the greateft or the graveft men pretend to any of this kind? Will magiftrates who punifh lewdnefs, or parfons who preach againft it, make any fcruple of committing it? And can a boy, a ftripling, have the confidence to talk of his virtue?" "Madam," fays Jofeph, "that boy is the brother of Pamela, and would be afhamed that the chaftity of his family, which is preferved in her, fhould be ftained in him. If there are fuch men as your ladyfhip mentions, I am forry for it; and I wifh they had an opportunity of reading over thofe letters which my father hath fent me of my fifter Pamela's; nor do I doubt but fuch an example would amend them." "You impudent villain!" cries the lady in a rage; "do you infult me with the follies of my relation, who hath expofed himfelf all over the country upon your fifter's account? a little vixen, whom I have always wondered my late Lady Booby ever kept in her houfe. Sirrah! get out of my fight, and prepare to fet out this night; for I will order you your wages immediately, and you fhall be ftripped and turned away." "Madam," fays Jofeph, "I am forry I have offended your ladyfhip, I am fure I never intended it." "Yes, firrah," cries fhe, "you have had the vanity to mifconftrue the little innocent freedom I took, in order to try whether what I had heard was true. O' my confcience, you have had the affurance to imagine I was fond of you myfelf." Jofeph anfwered, he had only fpoke out of tendernefs for his virtue; at which words fhe flew into a violent paffion, and refufing to hear more, ordered him inftantly to leave the room. He was no fooner gone than fhe burft forth into the following exclamation:--"Whither doth this violent paffion hurry us? What meanneffes do we fubmit to from its impulfe! Wifely we refift its firft and leaft approaches; for it is then only we can affure ourfelves the victory. No woman could ever fafely fay, fo far only will I go. Have I not expofed myfelf to the refufal of my footman? I cannot bear the reflection." Upon which fhe applied herfelf to the bell, and rung it with infinite more violence than was neceffary--the faithful Slipflop attending near at hand: to fay the truth, fhe had conceived a fufpicion at her laft interview with her miftrefs, and had waited ever fince in the antechamber, having carefully applied her ears to the keyhole during the whole time that the preceding converfation paffed between Jofeph and the lady. CHAPTER IX. _What paffed between the lady and Mrs Slipflop; in which we prophefy there are fome ftrokes which every one will not truly comprehend at the firft reading._ "Slipflop," faid the lady, "I find too much reafon to believe all thou haft told me of this wicked Jofeph; I have determined to part with him inftantly; fo go you to the fteward, and bid him pay his wages." Slipflop, who had preferved hitherto a diftance to her lady--rather out of neceffity than inclination--and who thought the knowledge of this fecret had thrown down all diftinction between them, anfwered her miftrefs very pertly--"She wifhed fhe knew her own mind; and that fhe was certain fhe would call her back again before fhe was got half-way downftairs." The lady replied, fhe had taken a refolution, and was refolved to keep it. "I am forry for it," cries Slipflop, "and, if I had known you would have punifhed the poor lad fo feverely, you fhould never have heard a particle of the matter. Here's a fufs indeed about nothing!" "Nothing!" returned my lady; "do you think I will countenance lewdnefs in my houfe?" "If you will turn away every footman," faid Slipflop, "that is a lover of the fport, you muft foon open the coach door yourfelf, or get a fet of mophrodites to wait upon you; and I am fure I hated the fight of them even finging in an opera." "Do as I bid you," fays my lady, "and don't fhock my ears with your beaftly language." "Marry-come-up," cries Slipflop, "people's ears are fometimes the niceft part about them." The lady, who began to admire the new ftyle in which her waiting-gentlewoman delivered herfelf, and by the conclufion of her fpeech fufpected fomewhat of the truth, called her back, and defired to know what fhe meant by the extraordinary degree of freedom in which fhe thought proper to indulge her tongue. "Freedom!" fays Slipflop; "I don't know what you call freedom, madam; fervants have tongues as well as their miftreffes." "Yes, and faucy ones too," anfwered the lady; "but I affure you I fhall bear no fuch impertinence." "Impertinence! I don't know that I am impertinent," fays Slipflop. "Yes, indeed you are," cries my lady, "and, unlefs you mend your manners, this houfe is no place for you." "Manners!" cries Slipflop; "I never was thought to want manners nor modefty neither; and for places, there are more places than one; and I know what I know." "What do you know, miftrefs?" anfwered the lady. "I am not obliged to tell that to everybody," fays Slipflop, "any more than I am obliged to keep it a fecret." "I defire you would provide yourfelf," anfwered the lady. "With all my heart," replied the waiting-gentlewoman; and fo departed in a paffion, and flapped the door after her. The lady too plainly perceived that her waiting-gentlewoman knew more than fhe would willingly have had her acquainted with; and this fhe imputed to Jofeph's having difcovered to her what paffed at the firft interview. This, therefore, blew up her rage againft him, and confirmed her in a refolution of parting with him. But the difmiffing Mrs Slipflop was a point not fo eafily to be refolved upon. She had the utmoft tendernefs for her reputation, as fhe knew on that depended many of the moft valuable bleffings of life; particularly cards, making curtfies in public places, and, above all, the pleafure of demolifhing the reputations of others, in which innocent amufement fhe had an extraordinary delight. She therefore determined to fubmit to any infult from a fervant, rather than run a rifque of lofing the title to fo many great privileges. She therefore fent for her fteward, Mr Peter Pounce, and ordered him to pay Jofeph his wages, to ftrip off his livery, and to turn him out of the houfe that evening. She then called Slipflop up, and, after refrefhing her fpirits with a fmall cordial, which fhe kept in her corfet, fhe began in the following manner:-- "Slipflop, why will you, who know my paffionate temper, attempt to provoke me by your anfwers? I am convinced you are an honeft fervant, and fhould be very unwilling to part with you. I believe, likewife, you have found me an indulgent miftrefs on many occafions, and have as little reafon on your fide to defire a change. I can't help being furprized, therefore, that you will take the fureft method to offend me--I mean, repeating my words, which you know I have always detefted." The prudent waiting-gentlewoman had duly weighed the whole matter, and found, on mature deliberation, that a good place in poffeffion was better than one in expectation. As fhe found her miftrefs, therefore, inclined to relent, fhe thought proper alfo to put on fome fmall condefcenfion, which was as readily accepted; and fo the affair was reconciled, all offences forgiven, and a prefent of a gown and petticoat made her, as an inftance of her lady's future favour. She offered once or twice to fpeak in favour of Jofeph; but found her lady's heart fo obdurate, that fhe prudently dropt all fuch efforts. She confidered there were more footmen in the houfe, and fome as ftout fellows, though not quite fo handfome, as Jofeph; befides, the reader hath already feen her tender advances had not met with the encouragement fhe might have reafonable expected. She thought fhe had thrown away a great deal of fack and fweetmeats on an ungrateful rafcal; and, being a little inclined to the opinion of that female fect, who hold one lufty young fellow to be nearly as good as another lufty young fellow, fhe at laft gave up Jofeph and his caufe, and, with a triumph over her paffion highly commendable, walked off with her prefent, and with great tranquillity paid a vifit to a ftone-bottle, which is of fovereign ufe to a philofophical temper. She left not her miftrefs fo eafy. The poor lady could not reflect without agony that her dear reputation was in the power of her fervants. All her comfort as to Jofeph was, that fhe hoped he did not underftand her meaning; at leaft fhe could fay for herfelf, fhe had not plainly expreffed anything to him; and as to Mrs Slipflop, fhe imagines fhe could bribe her to fecrecy. But what hurt her moft was, that in reality fhe had not fo entirely conquered her paffion; the little god lay lurking in her heart, though anger and diftain fo hood-winked her, that fhe could not fee him. She was a thoufand times on the very brink of revoking the fentence fhe had paffed againft the poor youth. Love became his advocate, and whifpered many things in his favour. Honour likewife endeavoured to vindicate his crime, and Pity to mitigate his punifhment. On the other fide, Pride and Revenge fpoke as loudly againft him. And thus the poor lady was tortured with perplexity, oppofite paffions diftracting and tearing her mind different ways. So have I feen, in the hall of Weftminfter, where Serjeant Bramble hath been retained on the right fide, and Serjeant Puzzle on the left, the balance of opinion (fo equal were their fees) alternately incline to either fcale. Now Bramble throws in an argument, and Puzzle's fcale ftrikes the beam; again Bramble fhares the like fate, overpowered by the weight of Puzzle. Here Bramble hits, there Puzzle ftrikes; here one has you, there t'other has you; till at laft all becomes one fcene of confufion in the tortured minds of the hearers; equal wagers are laid on the fuccefs, and neither judge nor jury can poffibly make anything of the matter; all things are fo enveloped by the careful ferjeants in doubt and obfcurity. Or, as it happens in the confcience, where honour and honefty pull one way, and a bribe and neceffity another.--If it was our prefent bufinefs only to make fimiles, we could produce many more to this purpofe; but a fimile (as well as a word) to the wife.--We fhall therefore fee a little after our hero, for whom the reader is doubtlefs in fome pain. CHAPTER X. _Jofeph writes another letter: his tranfactions with Mr Peter Pounce, &c., with his departure from Lady Booby._ The difconfolate Jofeph would not have had an underftanding fufficient for the principal fubject of fuch a book as this, if he had any longer mifunderftood the drift of his miftrefs; and indeed, that he did not difcern it fooner, the reader will be pleafed to impute to an unwillingnefs in him to difcover what he muft condemn in her as a fault. Having therefore quitted her prefence, he retired into his own garret, and entered himfelf into an ejaculation on the numberlefs calamities which attended beauty, and the miffortune it was to be handfomer than one's neighbours. He then fat down, and addreffed himfelf to his fifter Pamela in the following words:-- "Dear Sifter Pamela,--Hoping you are well, what news have I to tell you! O Pamela! my miftrefs is fallen in love with me-that is, what great folks call falling in love-fhe has a mind to ruin me; but I hope I fhall have more refolution and more grace than to part with my virtue to any lady upon earth. "Mr Adams hath often told me, that chaftity is as great a virtue in a man as in a woman. He fays he never knew any more than his wife, and I fhall endeavour to follow his example. Indeed, it is owing entirely to his excellent fermons and advice, together with your letters, that I have been able to refift a temptation, which, he fays, no man complies with, but he repents in this world, or is damned for it in the next; and why fhould I truft to repentance on my deathbed, fince I may die in my fleep? What fine things are good advice and good examples! But I am glad fhe turned me out of the chamber as fhe did: for I had once almoft forgotten every word parfon Adams had ever faid to me. "I don't doubt, dear fifter, but you will have grace to preferve your virtue againft all trials; and I beg you earneftly to pray I may be enabled to preferve mine; for truly it is very feverely attacked by more than one; but I hope I fhall copy your example, and that of Jofeph my namefake, and maintain my virtue againft all temptations." Jofeph had not finifhed his letter, when he was fummoned downftairs by Mr Peter Pounce, to receive his wages; for, befides that out of eight pounds a year he allowed his father and mother four, he had been obliged, in order to furnifh himfelf with mufical inftruments, to apply to the generofity of the aforefaid Peter, who, on urgent occafions, ufed to advance the fervants their wages: not before they were due, but before they were payable; that is, perhaps, half a year after they were due; and this at the moderate premium of fifty per cent, or a little more: by which charitable methods, together with lending money to other people, and even to his own mafter and miftrefs, the honeft man had, from nothing, in a few years amaffed a fmall fum of twenty thoufand pounds or thereabouts. Jofeph having received his little remainder of wages, and having ftript off his livery, was forced to borrow a frock and breeches of one of the fervants (for he was fo beloved in the family, that they would all have lent him anything): and, being told by Peter that he muft not ftay a moment longer in the houfe than was neceffary to pack up his linen, which he eafily did in a very narrow compafs, he took a melancholy leave of his fellow-fervants, and fet out at feven in the evening. He had proceeded the length of two or three ftreets, before he abfolutely determined with himfelf whether he fhould leave the town that night, or, procuring a lodging, wait till the morning. At laft, the moon fhining very bright helped him to come to a refolution of beginning his journey immediately, to which likewife he had fome other inducements; which the reader, without being a conjurer, cannot poffibly guefs, till we have given him thofe hints which it may be now proper to open. CHAPTER XI. _Of feveral new matters not expected._ It is an obfervation fometimes made, that to indicate our idea of a fimple fellow, we fay, he is eafily to be feen through: nor do I believe it a more improper denotation of a fimple book. Inftead of applying this to any particular performance, we chufe rather to remark the contrary in this hiftory, where the fcene opens itfelf by fmall degrees; and he is a fagacious reader who can fee two chapters before him. For this reafon, we have not hitherto hinted a matter which now feems neceffary to be explained; fince it may be wondered at, firft, that Jofeph made fuch extraordinary hafte out of town, which hath been already fhewn; and fecondly, which will be now fhewn, that, inftead of proceeding to the habitation of his father and mother, or to his beloved fifter Pamela, he chofe rather to fet out full fpeed to the Lady Booby's country-feat, which he had left on his journey to London. Be it known, then, that in the fame parifh where this feat ftood there lived a young girl whom Jofeph (though the beft of fons and brothers) longed more impatiently to fee than his parents or his fifter. She was a poor girl, who had formerly been bred up in Sir John's family; whence, a little before the journey to London, fhe had been difcarded by Mrs Slipflop, on account of her extraordinary beauty: for I never could find any other reafon. This young creature (who now lived with a farmer in the parifh) had been always beloved by Jofeph, and returned his affection. She was two years only younger than our hero. They had been acquainted from their infancy, and had conceived a very early liking for each other; which had grown to fuch a degree of affection, that Mr Adams had with much ado prevented them from marrying, and perfuaded them to wait till a few years' fervice and thrift had a little improved their experience, and enabled them to live comfortably together. They followed this good man's advice, as indeed his word was little lefs than a law in his parifh; for as he had fhown his parifhioners, by an uniform behaviour of thirty-five years' duration, that he had their good entirely at heart, fo they confulted him on every occafion, and very feldom acted contrary to his opinion. Nothing can be imagined more tender than was the parting between thefe two lovers. A thoufand fighs heaved the bofom of Jofeph, a thoufand tears diftilled from the lovely eyes of Fanny (for that was her name). Though her modefty would only fuffer her to admit his eager kiffes, her violent love made her more than paffive in his embraces; and fhe often pulled him to her breaft with a foft preffure, which though perhaps it would not have fqueezed an infect to death, caufed more emotion in the heart of Jofeph than the clofeft Cornifh hug could have done. The reader may perhaps wonder that fo fond a pair fhould, during a twelvemonth's abfence, never converfe with one another: indeed, there was but one reafon which did or could have prevented them; and this was, that poor Fanny could neither write nor read: nor could fhe be prevailed upon to tranfmit the delicacies of her tender and chafte paffion by the hands of an amanuenfis. They contented themfelves therefore with frequent inquiries after each other's health, with a mutual confidence in each other's fidelity, and the profpect of their future happinefs. Having explained thefe matters to our reader, and, as far as poffible, fatiffied all his doubts, we return to honeft Jofeph, whom we left juft fet out on his travels by the light of the moon. Thofe who have read any romance or poetry, antient or modern, muft have been informed that love hath wings: by which they are not to underftand, as fome young ladies by miftake have done, that a lover can fly; the writers, by this ingenious allegory, intending to infinuate no more than that lovers do not march like horfe-guards; in fhort, that they put the beft leg foremoft; which our lufty youth, who could walk with any man, did fo heartily on this occafion, that within four hours he reached a famous houfe of hofpitality well known to the weftern traveller. It prefents you a lion on the fign-poft: and the mafter, who was chriftened Timotheus, is commonly called plain Tim. Some have conceived that he hath particularly chofen the lion for his fign, as he doth in countenance greatly refemble that magnanimous beaft, though his difpofition favours more of the fweetnefs of the lamb. He is a perfon well received among all forts of men, being qualified to render himfelf agreeable to any; as he is well verfed in hiftory and politics, hath a fmattering in law and divinity, cracks a good jeft, and plays wonderfully well on the French horn. A violent ftorm of hail forced Jofeph to take fhelter in this inn, where he remembered Sir Thomas had dined in his way to town. Jofeph had no fooner feated himfelf by the kitchen fire than Timotheus, obferving his livery, began to condole the lofs of his late mafter; who was, he faid, his very particular and intimate acquaintance, with whom he had cracked many a merry bottle, ay many a dozen, in his time. He then remarked, that all thefe things were over now, all paffed, and juft as if they had never been; and concluded with an excellent obfervation on the certainty of death, which his wife faid was indeed very true. A fellow now arrived at the fame inn with two horfes, one of which he was leading farther down into the country to meet his mafter; thefe he put into the ftable, and came and took his place by Jofeph's fide, who immediately knew him to be the fervant of a neighbouring gentleman, who ufed to vifit at their houfe. This fellow was likewife forced in by the ftorm; for he had orders to go twenty miles farther that evening, and luckily on the fame road which Jofeph himfelf intended to take. He, therefore, embraced this opportunity of complimenting his friend with his mafter's horfe (notwithftanding he had received exprefs commands to the contrary), which was readily accepted; and fo, after they had drank a loving pot, and the ftorm was over, they fet out together. CHAPTER XII. _Containing many furprizing adventures which Jofeph Andrews met with on the road, fcarce credible to thofe who have never travelled in a ftage-coach._ Nothing remarkable happened on the road till their arrival at the inn to which the horfes were ordered; whither they came about two in the morning. The moon then fhone very bright; and Jofeph, making his friend a prefent of a pint of wine, and thanking him for the favour of his horfe, notwithftanding all entreaties to the contrary, proceeded on his journey on foot. He had not gone above two miles, charmed with the hope of fhortly feeing his beloved Fanny, when he was met by two fellows in a narrow lane, and ordered to ftand and deliver. He readily gave them all the money he had, which was fomewhat lefs than two pounds; and told them he hoped they would be fo generous as to return him a few fhillings, to defray his charges on his way home. One of the ruffians anfwered with an oath, "Yes, we'll give you fomething prefently: but firft ftrip and be d---n'd to you."--"Strip," cried the other, "or I'll blow your brains to the devil." Jofeph, remembering that he had borrowed his coat and breeches of a friend, and that he fhould be afhamed of making any excufe for not returning them, replied, he hoped they would not infift on his clothes, which were not worth much, but confider the coldnefs of the night. "You are cold, are you, you rafcal?" faid one of the robbers: "I'll warm you with a vengeance;" and, damning his eyes, fnapped a piftol at his head; which he had no fooner done than the other levelled a blow at him with his ftick, which Jofeph, who was expert at cudgel-playing, caught with his, and returned the favour fo fuccefffully on his adverfary, that he laid him fprawling at his feet, and at the fame inftant received a blow from behind, with the butt end of a piftol, from the other villain, which felled him to the ground, and totally deprived him of his fenfes. The thief who had been knocked down had now recovered himfelf; and both together fell to belabouring poor Jofeph with their fticks, till they were convinced they had put an end to his miferable being: they then ftripped him entirely naked, threw him into a ditch, and departed with their booty. The poor wretch, who lay motionlefs a long time, juft began to recover his fenfes as a ftage-coach came by. The poftillion, hearing a man's groans, ftopt his horfes, and told the coachman he was certain there was a dead man lying in the ditch, for he heard him groan. "Go on, firrah," fays the coachman; "we are confounded late, and have no time to look after dead men." A lady, who heard what the poftillion faid, and likewife heard the groan, called eagerly to the coachman to ftop and fee what was the matter. Upon which he bid the poftillion alight, and look into the ditch. He did fo, and returned, "that there was a man fitting upright, as naked as ever he was born."--"O J--fus!" cried the lady; "a naked man! Dear coachman, drive on and leave him." Upon this the gentlemen got out of the coach; and Jofeph begged them to have mercy upon him: for that he had been robbed and almoft beaten to death. "Robbed!" cries an old gentleman: "let us make all the hafte imaginable, or we fhall be robbed too." A young man who belonged to the law anfwered, "He wifhed they had paffed by without taking any notice; but that now they might be proved to have been laft in his company; if he fhould die they might be called to fome account for his murder. He therefore thought it advifable to fave the poor creature's life, for their own fakes, if poffible; at leaft, if he died, to prevent the jury's finding that they fled for it. He was therefore of opinion to take the man into the coach, and carry him to the next inn." The lady infifted, "That he fhould not come into the coach. That if they lifted him in, fhe would herfelf alight: for fhe had rather ftay in that place to all eternity than ride with a naked man." The coachman objected, "That he could not fuffer him to be taken in unlefs fomebody would pay a fhilling for his carriage the four miles." Which the two gentlemen refufed to do. But the lawyer, who was afraid of fome mifchief happening to himfelf, if the wretch was left behind in that condition, faying no man could be too cautious in thefe matters, and that he remembered very extraordinary cafes in the books, threatened the coachman, and bid him deny taking him up at his peril; for that, if he died, he fhould be indicted for his murder; and if he lived, and brought an action againft him, he would willingly take a brief in it. Thefe words had a fenfible effect on the coachman, who was well acquainted with the perfon who fpoke them; and the old gentleman above mentioned, thinking the naked man would afford him frequent opportunities of fhowing his wit to the lady, offered to join with the company in giving a mug of beer for his fare; till, partly alarmed by the threats of the one, and partly by the promifes of the other, and being perhaps a little moved with compaffion at the poor creature's condition, who ftood bleeding and fhivering with the cold, he at length agreed; and Jofeph was now advancing to the coach, where, feeing the lady, who held the fticks of her fan before her eyes, he abfolutely refufed, miferable as he was, to enter, unlefs he was furnifhed with fufficient covering to prevent giving the leaft offence to decency--fo perfectly modeft was this young man; fuch mighty effects had the fpotlefs example of the amiable Pamela, and the excellent fermons of Mr Adams, wrought upon him. Though there were feveral greatcoats about the coach, it was not eafy to get over this difficulty which Jofeph had ftarted. The two gentlemen complained they were cold, and could not fpare a rag; the man of wit faying, with a laugh, that charity began at home; and the coachman, who had two greatcoats fpread under him, refufed to lend either, left they fhould be made bloody: the lady's footman defired to be excufed for the fame reafon, which the lady herfelf, notwithftanding her abhorrence of a naked man, approved: and it is more than probable poor Jofeph, who obftinately adhered to his modeft refolution, muft have perifhed, unlefs the poftillion (a lad who hath been fince tranfported for robbing a hen-rooft) had voluntarily ftript off a greatcoat, his only garment, at the fame time fwearing a great oath (for which he was rebuked by the paffengers), "that he would rather ride in his fhirt all his life than fuffer a fellow-creature to lie in fo miferable a condition." Jofeph, having put on the greatcoat, was lifted into the coach, which now proceeded on its journey. He declared himfelf almoft dead with the cold, which gave the man of wit an occafion to afk the lady if fhe could not accommodate him with a dram. She anfwered, with fome refentment, "She wondered at his afking her fuch a queftion; but affured him fhe never tafted any fuch thing." The lawyer was inquiring into the circumftances of the robbery, when the coach ftopt, and one of the ruffians, putting a piftol in, demanded their money of the paffengers, who readily gave it them; and the lady, in her fright, delivered up a little filver bottle, of about a half-pint fize, which the rogue, clapping it to his mouth, and drinking her health, declared, held fome of the beft Nantes he had ever tafted: this the lady afterwards affured the company was the miftake of her maid, for that fhe had ordered her to fill the bottle with Hungary-water. As foon as the fellows were departed, the lawyer, who had, it feems, a cafe of piftols in the feat of the coach, informed the company, that if it had been daylight, and he could have come at his piftols, he would not have fubmitted to the robbery: he likewife fet forth that he had often met highwaymen when he travelled on horfeback, but none ever durft attack him; concluding that, if he had not been more afraid for the lady than for himfelf, he fhould not have now parted with his money fo eafily. As wit is generally obferved to love to refide in empty pockets, fo the gentleman whofe ingenuity we have above remarked, as foon as he had parted with his money, began to grow wonderfully facetious. He made frequent allufions to Adam and Eve, and faid many excellent things on figs and fig-leaves; which perhaps gave more offence to Jofeph than to any other in the company. The lawyer likewife made feveral very pretty jefts without departing from his profeffion. He faid, "If Jofeph and the lady were alone, he would be more capable of making a conveyance to her, as his affairs were not fettered with any incumbrance; he'd warrant he foon fuffered a recovery by a writ of entry, which was the proper way to create heirs in tail; that, for his own part, he would engage to make fo firm a fettlement in a coach, that there fhould be no danger of an ejectment," with an inundation of the like gibberifh, which he continued to vent till the coach arrived at an inn, where one fervant-maid only was up, in readinefs to attend the coachman, and furnifh him with cold meat and a dram. Jofeph defired to alight, and that he might have a bed prepared for him, which the maid readily promifed to perform; and, being a good-natured wench, and not fo fqueamifh as the lady had been, fhe clapt a large fagot on the fire, and, furnifhing Jofeph with a greatcoat belonging to one of the hoftlers, defired him to fit down and warm himfelf whilft fhe made his bed. The coachman, in the meantime, took an opportunity to call up a furgeon, who lived within a few doors; after which, he reminded his paffengers how late they were, and, after they had taken leave of Jofeph, hurried them off as faft as he could. The wench foon got Jofeph to bed, and promifed to ufe her intereft to borrow him a fhirt; but imagining, as fhe afterwards faid, by his being fo bloody, that he muft be a dead man, fhe ran with all fpeed to haften the furgeon, who was more than half dreft, apprehending that the coach had been overturned, and fome gentleman or lady hurt. As foon as the wench had informed him at his window that it was a poor foot-paffenger who had been ftripped of all he had, and almoft murdered, he chid her for difturbing him fo early, flipped off his clothes again, and very quietly returned to bed and to fleep. Aurora now began to fhew her blooming cheeks over the hills, whilft ten millions of feathered fongfters, in jocund chorus, repeated odes a thoufand times fweeter than thofe of our laureat, and fung both the day and the fong; when the mafter of the inn, Mr Tow-woufe, arofe, and learning from his maid an account of the robbery, and the fituation of his poor naked gueft, he fhook his head, and cried, "good-lack-a-day!" and then ordered the girl to carry him one of his own fhirts. Mrs Tow-woufe was juft awake, and had ftretched out her arms in vain to fold her departed hufband, when the maid entered the room. "Who's there? Betty?"--"Yes, madam."--"Where's your mafter?"--"He's without, madam; he hath fent me for a fhirt to lend a poor naked man, who hath been robbed and murdered."--"Touch one if you dare, you flut," faid Mrs Tow-woufe: "your mafter is a pretty fort of a man, to take in naked vagabonds, and clothe them with his own clothes. I fhall have no fuch doings. If you offer to touch anything, I'll throw the chamber-pot at your head. Go, fend your mafter to me."--"Yes, madam," anfwered Betty. As foon as he came in, fhe thus began: "What the devil do you mean by this, Mr Tow-woufe? Am I to buy fhirts to lend to a fet of fcabby rafcals?"--"My dear," faid Mr Tow-woufe, "this is a poor wretch."--"Yes," fays fhe, "I know it is a poor wretch; but what the devil have we to do with poor wretches? The law makes us provide for too many already. We fhall have thirty or forty poor wretches in red coats fhortly."--"My dear," cries Tow-woufe, "this man hath been robbed of all he hath."--"Well then," faid fhe, "where's his money to pay his reckoning? Why doth not fuch a fellow go to an alehoufe? I fhall fend him packing as foon as I am up, I affure you."--"My dear," faid he, "common charity won't fuffer you to do that."--"Common charity, a f--t!" fays fhe, "common charity teaches us to provide for ourfelves and our families; and I and mine won't be ruined by your charity, I affure you."--"Well," fays he, "my dear, do as you will, when you are up; you know I never contradict you."--"No," fays fhe; "if the devil was to contradict me, I would make the houfe too hot to hold him." With fuch like difcourfes they confumed near half-an-hour, whilft Betty provided a fhirt from the hoftler, who was one of her fweethearts, and put it on poor Jofeph. The furgeon had likewife at laft vifited him, and wafhed and dreft his wounds, and was now come to acquaint Mr Tow-woufe that his gueft was in fuch extreme danger of his life, that he fcarce faw any hopes of his recovery. "Here's a pretty kettle of fifh," cries Mrs Tow-woufe, "you have brought upon us! We are like to have a funeral at our own expenfe." Tow-woufe (who, notwithftanding his charity, would have given his vote as freely as ever he did at an election, that any other houfe in the kingdom fhould have quiet poffeffion of his gueft) anfwered, "My dear, I am not to blame; he was brought hither by the ftage-coach, and Betty had put him to bed before I was ftirring."--"I'll Betty her," fays fhe.--At which, with half her garments on, the other half under her arm, fhe fallied out in queft of the unfortunate Betty, whilft Tow-woufe and the furgeon went to pay a vifit to poor Jofeph, and inquire into the circumftances of this melancholy affair. CHAPTER XIII. _What happened to Jofeph during his ficknefs at the inn, with the curious difcourfe between him and Mr Barnabas, the parfon of the parifh._ As foon as Jofeph had communicated a particular hiftory of the robbery, together with a fhort account of himfelf, and his intended journey, he afked the furgeon if he apprehended him to be in any danger: to which the furgeon very honeftly anfwered, "He feared he was; for that his pulfe was very exalted and feverifh, and, if his fever fhould prove more than fymptomatic, it would be impoffible to fave him." Jofeph, fetching a deep figh, cried, "Poor Fanny, I would I could have lived to fee thee! but God's will be done." The furgeon then advifed him, if he had any worldly affairs to fettle, that he would do it as foon as poffible; for, though he hoped he might recover, yet he thought himfelf obliged to acquaint him he was in great danger; and if the malign concoction of his humours fhould caufe a fufcitation of his fever, he might foon grow delirious and incapable to make his will. Jofeph anfwered, "That it was impoffible for any creature in the univerfe to be in a poorer condition than himfelf; for fince the robbery he had not one thing of any kind whatever which he could call his own." "I had," faid he, "a poor little piece of gold, which they took away, that would have been a comfort to me in all my afflictions; but furely, Fanny, I want nothing to remind me of thee. I have thy dear image in my heart, and no villain can ever tear it thence." Jofeph defired paper and pens, to write a letter, but they were refufed him; and he was advifed to ufe all his endeavours to compofe himfelf. They then left him; and Mr Tow-woufe fent to a clergyman to come and adminifter his good offices to the foul of poor Jofeph, fince the furgeon defpaired of making any fucceffful applications to his body. Mr Barnabas (for that was the clergyman's name) came as foon as fent for; and, having firft drank a difh of tea with the landlady, and afterwards a bowl of punch with the landlord, he walked up to the room where Jofeph lay; but, finding him afleep, returned to take the other fneaker; which when he had finifhed, he again crept foftly up to the chamber-door, and, having opened it, heard the fick man talking to himfelf in the following manner:-- "O moft adorable Pamela! moft virtuous fifter! whofe example could alone enable me to withftand all the temptations of riches and beauty, and to preferve my virtue pure and chafte for the arms of my dear Fanny, if it had pleafed Heaven that I fhould ever have come unto them. What riches, or honours, or pleafures, can make us amends for the lofs of innocence? Doth not that alone afford us more confolation than all worldly acquifitions? What but innocence and virtue could give any comfort to fuch a miferable wretch as I am? Yet thefe can make me prefer this fick and painful bed to all the pleafures I fhould have found in my lady's. Thefe can make me face death without fear; and though I love my Fanny more than ever man loved a woman, thefe can teach me to refign myfelf to the Divine will without repining. O thou delightful charming creature! if Heaven had indulged thee to my arms, the pooreft, humbleft ftate would have been a paradife; I could have lived with thee in the loweft cottage without envying the palaces, the dainties, or the riches of any man breathing. But I muft leave thee, leave thee for ever, my deareft angel! I muft think of another world; and I heartily pray thou may'ft meet comfort in this."--Barnabas thought he had heard enough, fo downftairs he went, and told Tow-woufe he could do his gueft no fervice; for that he was very light-headed, and had uttered nothing but a rhapfody of nonfenfe all the time he ftayed in the room. The furgeon returned in the afternoon, and found his patient in a higher fever, as he faid, than when he left him, though not delirious; for, notwithftanding Mr Barnabas's opinion, he had not been once out of his fenfes fince his arrival at the inn. Mr Barnabas was again fent for, and with much difficulty prevailed on to make another vifit. As foon as he entered the room he told Jofeph "He was come to pray by him, and to prepare him for another world: in the firft place, therefore, he hoped he had repented of all his fins." Jofeph anfwered, "He hoped he had; but there was one thing which he knew not whether he fhould call a fin; if it was, he feared he fhould die in the commiffion of it; and that was, the regret of parting with a young woman whom he loved as tenderly as he did his heart-ftrings." Barnabas bad him be affured "that any repining at the Divine will was one of the greateft fins he could commit; that he ought to forget all carnal affections, and think of better things." Jofeph faid, "That neither in this world nor the next he could forget his Fanny; and that the thought, however grievous, of parting from her for ever, was not half fo tormenting as the fear of what fhe would fuffer when fhe knew his miffortune." Barnabas faid, "That fuch fears argued a diffidence and defpondence very criminal; that he muft diveft himfelf of all human paffions, and fix his heart above." Jofeph anfwered, "That was what he defired to do, and fhould be obliged to him if he would enable him to accomplifh it." Barnabas replied, "That muft be done by grace." Jofeph befought him to difcover how he might attain it. Barnabas anfwered, "By prayer and faith." He then queftioned him concerning his forgivenefs of the thieves. Jofeph anfwered, "He feared that was more than he could do; for nothing would give him more pleafure than to hear they were taken."--"That," cries Barnabas, "is for the fake of juftice."--"Yes," faid Jofeph, "but if I was to meet them again, I am afraid I fhould attack them, and kill them too, if I could."--"Doubtlefs," anfwered Barnabas, "it is lawful to kill a thief; but can you fay you forgive them as a Chriftian ought?" Jofeph defired to know what that forgivenefs was. "That is," anfwered Barnabas, "to forgive them as--as--it is to forgive them as--in fhort, it is to forgive them as a Chriftian."-- Jofeph replied, "He forgave them as much as he could."--"Well, well," faid Barnabas, "that will do." He then demanded of him, "If he remembered any more fins unrepented of; and if he did, he defired him to make hafte and repent of them as faft as he could, that they might repeat over a few prayers together." Jofeph anfwered, "He could not recollect any great crimes he had been guilty of, and that thofe he had committed he was fincerely forry for." Barnabas faid that was enough, and then proceeded to prayer with all the expedition he was mafter of, fome company then waiting for him below in the parlour, where the ingredients for punch were all in readinefs; but no one would fqueeze the oranges till he came. Jofeph complained he was dry, and defired a little tea; which Barnabas reported to Mrs Tow-woufe, who anfwered, "She had juft done drinking it, and could not be flopping all day;" but ordered Betty to carry him up fome fmall beer. Betty obeyed her miftrefs's commands; but Jofeph, as foon as he had tafted it, faid, he feared it would increafe his fever, and that he longed very much for tea; to which the good-natured Betty anfwered, he fhould have tea, if there was any in the land; fhe accordingly went and bought him fome herfelf, and attended him with it; where we will leave her and Jofeph together for fome time, to entertain the reader with other matters. CHAPTER XIV. _Being very full of adventures which fucceeded each other at the inn._ It was now the dufk of the evening, when a grave perfon rode into the inn, and, committing his horfe to the hoftler, went directly into the kitchen, and, having called for a pipe of tobacco, took his place by the firefide, where feveral other perfons were likewife affembled. The difcourfe ran altogether on the robbery which was committed the night before, and on the poor wretch who lay above in the dreadful condition in which we have already feen him. Mrs Tow-woufe faid, "She wondered what the devil Tom Whipwell meant by bringing fuch guefts to her houfe, when there were fo many alehoufes on the road proper for their reception. But fhe affured him, if he died, the parifh fhould be at the expenfe of the funeral." She added, "Nothing would ferve the fellow's turn but tea, fhe would affure him." Betty, who was juft returned from her charitable office, anfwered, fhe believed he was a gentleman, for fhe never faw a finer fkin in her life. "Pox on his fkin!" replied Mrs Tow-woufe, "I fuppofe that is all we are like to have for the reckoning. I defire no fuch gentlemen fhould ever call at the Dragon" (which it feems was the fign of the inn). The gentleman lately arrived difcovered a great deal of emotion at the diftrefs of this poor creature, whom he obferved to be fallen not into the moft compaffionate hands. And indeed, if Mrs Tow-woufe had given no utterance to the fweetnefs of her temper, nature had taken fuch pains in her countenance, that Hogarth himfelf never gave more expreffion to a picture. Her perfon was fhort, thin, and crooked. Her forehead projected in the middle, and thence defcended in a declivity to the top of her nofe, which was fharp and red, and would have hung over her lips, had not nature turned up the end of it. Her lips were two bits of fkin, which, whenever fhe fpoke, fhe drew together in a purfe. Her chin was peaked; and at the upper end of that fkin which compofed her cheeks, ftood two bones, that almoft hid a pair of fmall red eyes. Add to this a voice moft wonderfully adapted to the fentiments it was to convey, being both loud and hoarfe. It is not eafy to fay whether the gentleman had conceived a greater diflike for his landlady or compaffion for her unhappy gueft. He inquired very earneftly of the furgeon, who was now come into the kitchen, whether he had any hopes of his recovery? He begged him to ufe all poffible means towards it, telling him, "it was the duty of men of all profeffions to apply their fkill gratis for the relief of the poor and neceffitous." The furgeon anfwered, "He fhould take proper care; but he defied all the furgeons in London to do him any good."--"Pray, fir," faid the gentleman, "what are his wounds?"--"Why, do you know anything of wounds?" fays the furgeon (winking upon Mrs Tow-woufe).--"Sir, I have a fmall fmattering in furgery," anfwered the gentleman.--"A fmattering--ho, ho, ho!" faid the furgeon; "I believe it is a fmattering indeed." The company were all attentive, expecting to hear the doctor, who was what they call a dry fellow, expofe the gentleman. He began therefore with an air of triumph: "I fuppofe, fir, you have travelled?"--"No, really, fir," faid the gentleman.--"Ho! then you have practifed in the hofpitals perhaps?"--"No, fir."--"Hum! not that neither? Whence, fir, then, if I may be fo bold to inquire, have you got your knowledge in furgery?"--"Sir," anfwered the gentleman, "I do not pretend to much; but the little I know I have from books."--"Books!" cries the doctor. "What, I fuppofe you have read Galen and Hippocrates!"--"No, fir," faid the gentleman.--"How! you underftand furgery," anfwers the doctor, "and not read Galen and Hippocrates?"-- "Sir," cries the other, "I believe there are many furgeons who have never read thefe authors."--"I believe fo too," fays the doctor, "more fhame for them; but, thanks to my education, I have them by heart, and very feldom go without them both in my pocket."--"They are pretty large books," faid the gentleman.--"Aye," faid the doctor, "I believe I know how large they are better than you." (At which he fell a winking, and the whole company burft into a laugh.) The doctor purfuing his triumph, afked the gentleman, "If he did not underftand phyfic as well as furgery." "Rather better," anfwered the gentleman.--"Aye, like enough," cries the doctor, with a wink. "Why, I know a little of phyfic too."--"I wifh I knew half fo much," faid Tow-woufe, "I'd never wear an apron again."--"Why, I believe, landlord," cries the doctor, "there are few men, though I fay it, within twelve miles of the place, that handle a fever better. _Veniente accurrite morbo_: that is my method. I fuppofe, brother, you underftand _Latin_?"--"A little," fays the gentleman.--"Aye, and Greek now, I'll warrant you: _Ton dapomibominos poluflofboio Thalaffes_. But I have almoft forgot thefe things: I could have repeated Homer by heart once."--"Ifags! the gentleman has caught a traytor," fays Mrs Tow-woufe; at which they all fell a laughing. The gentleman, who had not the leaft affection for joking, very contentedly fuffered the doctor to enjoy his victory, which he did with no fmall fatiffaction; and, having fufficiently founded his depth, told him, "He was thoroughly convinced of his great learning and abilities; and that he would be obliged to him if he would let him know his opinion of his patient's cafe above-ftairs."--"Sir," fays the doctor, "his cafe is that of a dead man--the contufion on his head has perforated the internal membrane of the occiput, and divelicated that radical fmall minute invifible nerve which coheres to the pericranium; and this was attended with a fever at firft fymptomatic, then pneumatic; and he is at length grown deliriuus, or delirious, as the vulgar exprefs it." He was proceeding in this learned manner, when a mighty noife interrupted him. Some young fellows in the neighbourhood had taken one of the thieves, and were bringing him into the inn. Betty ran upftairs with this news to Jofeph, who begged they might fearch for a little piece of broken gold, which had a ribband tied to it, and which he could fwear to amongft all the hoards of the richeft men in the univerfe. Notwithftanding the fellow's perfifting in his innocence, the mob were very bufy in fearching him, and prefently, among other things, pulled out the piece of gold juft mentioned; which Betty no fooner faw than fhe laid violent hands on it, and conveyed it up to Jofeph, who received it with raptures of joy, and, hugging it in his bofom, declared he could now die contented. Within a few minutes afterwards came in fome other fellows, with a bundle which they had found in a ditch, and which was indeed the cloaths which had been ftripped off from Jofeph, and the other things they had taken from him. The gentleman no fooner faw the coat than he declared he knew the livery; and, if it had been taken from the poor creature above-ftairs, defired he might fee him; for that he was very well acquainted with the family to whom that livery belonged. He was accordingly conducted up by Betty; but what, reader, was the furprize on both fides, when he faw Jofeph was the perfon in bed, and when Jofeph difcovered the face of his good friend Mr Abraham Adams! It would be impertinent to infert a difcourfe which chiefly turned on the relation of matters already well known to the reader; for, as foon as the curate had fatiffied Jofeph concerning the perfect health of his Fanny, he was on his fide very inquifitive into all the particulars which had produced this unfortunate accident. To return therefore to the kitchen, where a great variety of company were now affembled from all the rooms of the houfe, as well as the neighbourhood: fo much delight do men take in contemplating the countenance of a thief. Mr Tow-woufe began to rub his hands with pleafure at feeing fo large an affembly; who would, he hoped, fhortly adjourn into feveral apartments, in order to difcourfe over the robbery, and drink a health to all honeft men. But Mrs Tow-woufe, whofe miffortune it was commonly to fee things a little perverfely, began to rail at thofe who brought the fellow into her houfe; telling her hufband, "They were very likely to thrive who kept a houfe of entertainment for beggars and thieves." The mob had now finifhed their fearch, and could find nothing about the captive likely to prove any evidence; for as to the cloaths, though the mob were very well fatiffied with that proof, yet, as the furgeon obferved, they could not convict him, becaufe they were not found in his cuftody; to which Barnabas agreed, and added that thefe were _bona waviata_, and belonged to the lord of the manor. "How," fays the furgeon, "do you fay thefe goods belong to the lord of the manor?"--"I do," cried Barnabas.--"Then I deny it," fays the furgeon: "what can the lord of the manor have to do in the cafe? Will any one attempt to perfuade me that what a man finds is not his own?"--"I have heard," fays an old fellow in the corner, "juftice Wife-one fay, that, if every man had his right, whatever is found belongs to the king of London."--"That may be true," fays Barnabas, "in fome fenfe; for the law makes a difference between things ftolen and things found; for a thing may be ftolen that never is found, and a thing may be found that never was ftolen: Now, goods that are both ftolen and found are _waviata_; and they belong to the lord of the manor."--"So the lord of the manor is the receiver of ftolen goods," fays the doctor; at which there was an univerfal laugh, being firft begun by himfelf. While the prifoner, by perfifting in his innocence, had almoft (as there was no evidence againft him) brought over Barnabas, the furgeon, Tow-woufe, and feveral others to his fide, Betty informed them that they had overlooked a little piece of gold, which fhe had carried up to the man in bed, and which he offered to fwear to amongft a million, aye, amongft ten thoufand. This immediately turned the fcale againft the prifoner, and every one now concluded him guilty. It was refolved, therefore, to keep him fecured that night, and early in the morning to carry him before a juftice. CHAPTER XV. _Showing how Mrs Tow-woufe was a little mollified; and how officious Mr Barnabas and the furgeon were to profecute the thief: with a differtation accounting for their zeal, and that of many other perfons not mentioned in this hiftory._ Betty told her miftrefs fhe believed the man in bed was a greater man than they took him for; for, befides the extreme whitenefs of his fkin, and the foftnefs of his hands, fhe obferved a very great familiarity between the gentleman and him; and added, fhe was certain they were intimate acquaintance, if not relations. This fomewhat abated the feverity of Mrs Tow-woufe's countenance. She faid, "God forbid fhe fhould not difcharge the duty of a Chriftian, fince the poor gentleman was brought to her houfe. She had a natural antipathy to vagabonds; but could pity the miffortunes of a Chriftian as foon as another." Tow-woufe faid, "If the traveller be a gentleman, though he hath no money about him now, we fhall moft likely be paid hereafter; fo you may begin to fcore whenever you will." Mrs Tow-woufe anfwered, "Hold your fimple tongue, and don't inftruct me in my bufinefs. I am fure I am forry for the gentleman's miffortune with all my heart; and I hope the villain who hath ufed him fo barbaroufly will be hanged. Betty, go fee what he wants. God forbid he fhould want anything in my houfe." Barnabas and the furgeon went up to Jofeph to fatiffy themfelves concerning the piece of gold; Jofeph was with difficulty prevailed upon to fhow it them, but would by no entreaties be brought to deliver it out of his own poffeffion. He however attefted this to be the fame which had been taken from him, and Betty was ready to fwear to the finding it on the thief. The only difficulty that remained was, how to produce this gold before the juftice; for as to carrying Jofeph himfelf, it feemed impoffible; nor was there any great likelihood of obtaining it from him, for he had faftened it with a ribband to his arm, and folemnly vowed that nothing but irrefiftible force fhould ever feparate them; in which refolution, Mr Adams, clenching a fift rather lefs than the knuckle of an ox, declared he would fupport him. A difpute arofe on this occafion concerning evidence not very neceffary to be related here; after which the furgeon dreffed Mr Jofeph's head, ftill perfifting in the imminent danger in which his patient lay, but concluding, with a very important look, "That he began to have fome hopes; that he fhould fend him a fanative foporiferous draught, and would fee him in the morning." After which Barnabas and he departed, and left Mr Jofeph and Mr Adams together. Adams informed Jofeph of the occafion of this journey which he was making to London, namely, to publifh three volumes of fermons; being encouraged, as he faid, by an advertifement lately fet forth by the fociety of bookfellers, who propofed to purchafe any copies offered to them, at a price to be fettled by two perfons; but though he imagined he fhould get a confiderable fum of money on this occafion, which his family were in urgent need of, he protefted he would not leave Jofeph in his prefent condition: finally, he told him, "He had nine fhillings and threepence halfpenny in his pocket, which he was welcome to ufe as he pleafed." This goodnefs of parfon Adams brought tears into Jofeph's eyes; he declared, "He had now a fecond reafon to defire life, that he might fhow his gratitude to fuch a friend." Adams bade him "be cheerful; for that he plainly faw the furgeon, befides his ignorance, defired to make a merit of curing him, though the wounds in his head, he perceived, were by no means dangerous; that he was convinced he had no fever, and doubted not but he would be able to travel in a day or two." Thefe words infufed a fpirit into Jofeph; he faid, "He found himfelf very fore from the bruifes, but had no reafon to think any of his bones injured, or that he had received any harm in his infide, unlefs that he felt fomething very odd in his ftomach; but he knew not whether that might not arife from not having eaten one morfel for above twenty-four hours." Being then afked if he had any inclination to eat, he anfwered in the affirmative. Then parfon Adams defired him to "name what he had the greateft fancy for; whether a poached egg, or chicken-broth." He anfwered, "He could eat both very well; but that he feemed to have the greateft appetite for a piece of boiled beef and cabbage." Adams was pleafed with fo perfect a confirmation that he had not the leaft fever, but advifed him to a lighter diet for that evening. He accordingly ate either a rabbit or a fowl, I never could with any tolerable certainty difcover which; after this he was, by Mrs Tow-woufe's order, conveyed into a better bed and equipped with one of her hufband's fhirts. In the morning early, Barnabas and the furgeon came to the inn, in order to fee the thief conveyed before the juftice. They had confumed the whole night in debating what meafures they fhould take to produce the piece of gold in evidence againft him; for they were both extremely zealous in the bufinefs, though neither of them were in the leaft interefted in the profecution; neither of them had ever received any private injury from the fellow, nor had either of them ever been fufpected of loving the publick well enough to give them a fermon or a dofe of phyfic for nothing. To help our reader, therefore, as much as poffible to account for this zeal, we muft inform him that, as this parifh was fo unfortunate as to have no lawyer in it, there had been a conftant contention between the two doctors, fpiritual and phyfical, concerning their abilities in a fcience, in which, as neither of them profeffed it, they had equal pretenfions to difpute each other's opinions. Thefe difputes were carried on with great contempt on both fides, and had almoft divided the parifh; Mr Tow-woufe and one half of the neighbours inclining to the furgeon, and Mrs Tow-woufe with the other half to the parfon. The furgeon drew his knowledge from thofe ineftimable fountains, called The Attorney's Pocket Companion, and Mr Jacob's Law-Tables; Barnabas trufted entirely to Wood's Inftitutes. It happened on this occafion, as was pretty frequently the cafe, that thefe two learned men differed about the fufficiency of evidence; the doctor being of opinion that the maid's oath would convict the prifoner without producing the gold; the parfon, _ contra, totis viribus._ To difplay their parts, therefore, before the juftice and the parifh, was the fole motive which we can difcover to this zeal which both of them pretended to have for public juftice. O Vanity! how little is thy force acknowledged, or thy operations difcerned! How wantonly doft thou deceive mankind under different difguifes! Sometimes thou doft wear the face of pity, fometimes of generofity: nay, thou haft the affurance even to put on thofe glorious ornaments which belong only to heroic virtue. Thou odious, deformed monfter! whom priefts have railed at, philofophers defpifed, and poets ridiculed; is there a wretch fo abandoned as to own thee for an acquaintance in public?--yet, how few will refufe to enjoy thee in private? nay, thou art the purfuit of moft men through their lives. The greateft villainies are daily practifed to pleafe thee; nor is the meaneft thief below, or the greateft hero above, thy notice. Thy embraces are often the fole aim and fole reward of the private robbery and the plundered province. It is to pamper up thee, thou harlot, that we attempt to withdraw from others what we do not want, or to withhold from them what they do. All our paffions are thy flaves. Avarice itfelf is often no more than thy handmaid, and even Luft thy pimp. The bully Fear, like a coward, flies before thee, and Joy and Grief hide their heads in thy prefence. I know thou wilt think that whilft I abufe thee I court thee, and that thy love hath infpired me to write this farcaftical panegyric on thee; but thou art deceived: I value thee not of a farthing; nor will it give me any pain if thou fhouldft prevail on the reader to cenfure this digreffion as arrant nonfenfe; for know, to thy confufion, that I have introduced thee for no other purpofe than to lengthen out a fhort chapter, and fo I return to my hiftory. CHAPTER XVI. _The efcape of the thief. Mr Adams's difappointment. The arrival of two very extraordinary perfonages, and the introduction of parfon Adams to parfon Barnabas._ Barnabas and the furgeon, being returned, as we have faid, to the inn, in order to convey the thief before the juftice, were greatly concerned to find a fmall accident had happened, which fomewhat difconcerted them; and this was no other than the thief's efcape, who had modeftly withdrawn himfelf by night, declining all oftentation, and not chufing, in imitation of fome great men, to diftinguifh himfelf at the expenfe of being pointed at. When the company had retired the evening before, the thief was detained in a room where the conftable, and one of the young fellows who took him, were planted as his guard. About the fecond watch a general complaint of drought was made, both by the prifoner and his keepers. Among whom it was at laft agreed that the conftable fhould remain on duty, and the young fellow call up the tapfter; in which difpofition the latter apprehended not the leaft danger, as the conftable was well armed, and could befides eafily fummon him back to his affiftance, if the prifoner made the leaft attempt to gain his liberty. The young fellow had not long left the room before it came into the conftable's head that the prifoner might leap on him by furprize, and, thereby preventing him of the ufe of his weapons, efpecially the long ftaff in which he chiefly confided, might reduce the fuccefs of a ftruggle to a equal chance. He wifely, therefore, to prevent this inconvenience, flipt out of the room himfelf, and locked the door, waiting without with his ftaff in his hand, ready lifted to fell the unhappy prifoner, if by ill fortune he fhould attempt to break out. But human life, as hath been difcovered by fome great man or other (for I would by no means be underftood to affect the honour of making any fuch difcovery), very much refembles a game at chefs; for as in the latter, while a gamefter is too attentive to fecure himfelf very ftrongly on one fide the board, he is apt to leave an unguarded opening on the other; fo doth it often happen in life, and fo did it happen on this occafion; for whilft the cautious conftable with fuch wonderful fagacity had poffeffed himfelf of the door, he moft unhappily forgot the window. The thief, who played on the other fide, no fooner perceived this opening than he began to move that way; and, finding the paffage eafy, he took with him the young fellow's hat, and without any ceremony ftepped into the ftreet and made the beft of his way. The young fellow, returning with a double mug of ftrong beer, was a little furprized to find the conftable at the door; but much more fo when, the door being opened, he perceived the prifoner had made his efcape, and which way. He threw down the beer, and, without uttering anything to the conftable except a hearty curfe or two, he nimbly leapt out of the window, and went again in purfuit of his prey, being very unwilling to lofe the reward which he had affured himfelf of. The conftable hath not been difcharged of fufpicion on this account; it hath been faid that, not being concerned in the taking the thief, he could not have been entitled to any part of the reward if he had been convicted; that the thief had feveral guineas in his pocket; that it was very unlikely he fhould have been guilty of fuch an overfight; that his pretence for leaving the room was abfurd; that it was his conftant maxim, that a wife man never refufed money on any conditions; that at every election he always had fold his vote to both parties, &c. But, notwithftanding thefe and many other fuch allegations, I am fufficiently convinced of his innocence; having been pofitively affured of it by thofe who received their informations from his own mouth; which, in the opinion of fome moderns, is the beft and indeed only evidence. All the family were now up, and with many others affembled in the kitchen, where Mr Tow-woufe was in fome tribulation; the furgeon having declared that by law he was liable to be indicted for the thief's efcape, as it was out of his houfe; he was a little comforted, however, by Mr Barnabas's opinion, that as the efcape was by night the indictment would not lie. Mrs Tow-woufe delivered herfelf in the following words: "Sure never was fuch a fool as my hufband; would any other perfon living have left a man in the cuftody of fuch a drunken drowfy blockhead as Tom Suckbribe?" (which was the conftable's name); "and if he could be indicted without any harm to his wife and children, I fhould be glad of it." (Then the bell rung in Jofeph's room.) "Why Betty, John, Chamberlain, where the devil are you all? Have you no ears, or no confcience, not to tend the fick better? See what the gentleman wants. Why don't you go yourfelf, Mr Tow-woufe? But any one may die for you; you have no more feeling than a deal board. If a man lived a fortnight in your houfe without fpending a penny, you would never put him in mind of it. See whether he drinks tea or coffee for breakfaft." "Yes, my dear," cried Tow-woufe. She then afked the doctor and Mr Barnabas what morning's draught they chofe, who anfwered, they had a pot of cyder-and at the fire; which we will leave them merry over, and return to Jofeph. He had rofe pretty early this morning; but, though his wounds were far from threatening any danger, he was fo fore with the bruifes, that it was impoffible for him to think of undertaking a journey yet; Mr Adams, therefore, whofe ftock was vifibly decreafed with the expenfes of fupper and breakfaft, and which could not furvive that day's fcoring, began to confider how it was poffible to recruit it. At laft he cried, "He had luckily hit on a fure method, and, though it would oblige him to return himfelf home together with Jofeph, it mattered not much." He then fent for Tow-woufe, and, taking him into another room, told him "he wanted to borrow three guineas, for which he would put ample fecurity into his hands." Tow-woufe, who expected a watch, or ring, or fomething of double the value, anfwered, "He believed he could furnifh him." Upon which Adams, pointing to his faddle-bag, told him, with a face and voice full of folemnity, "that there were in that bag no lefs than nine volumes of manufcript fermons, as well worth a hundred pounds as a fhilling was worth twelve pence, and that he would depofit one of the volumes in his hands by way of pledge; not doubting but that he would have the honefty to return it on his repayment of the money; for otherwife he muft be a very great lofer, feeing that every volume would at leaft bring him ten pounds, as he had been informed by a neighbouring clergyman in the country; for," faid he, "as to my own part, having never yet dealt in printing, I do not pretend to afcertain the exact value of fuch things." Tow-woufe, who was a little furprized at the pawn, faid (and not without fome truth), "That he was no judge of the price of fuch kind of goods; and as for money, he really was very fhort." Adams anfwered, "Certainly he would not fcruple to lend him three guineas on what was undoubtedly worth at leaft ten." The landlord replied, "He did not believe he had fo much money in the houfe, and befides, he was to make up a fum. He was very confident the books were of much higher value, and heartily forry it did not fuit him." He then cried out, "Coming fir!" though nobody called; and ran downftairs without any fear of breaking his neck. Poor Adams was extremely dejected at this difappointment, nor knew he what further ftratagem to try. He immediately applied to his pipe, his conftant friend and comfort in his afflictions; and, leaning over the rails, he devoted himfelf to meditation, affifted by the infpiring fumes of tobacco. He had on a nightcap drawn over his wig, and a fhort greatcoat, which half covered his caffock--a drefs which, added to fomething comical enough in his countenance, compofed a figure likely to attract the eyes of thofe who were not over given to obfervation. Whilft he was fmoaking his pipe in this pofture, a coach and fix, with a numerous attendance, drove into the inn. There alighted from the coach a young fellow and a brace of pointers, after which another young fellow leapt from the box, and fhook the former by the hand; and both, together with the dogs, were inftantly conducted by Mr Tow-woufe into an apartment; whither as they paffed, they entertained themfelves with the following fhort facetious dialogue:-- "You are a pretty fellow for a coachman, Jack!" fays he from the coach; "you had almoft overturned us juft now."--"Pox take you!" fays the coachman; "if I had only broke your neck, it would have been faving fomebody elfe the trouble; but I fhould have been forry for the pointers."--"Why, you fon of a b--," anfwered the other, "if nobody could fhoot better than you, the pointers would be of no ufe."--"D--n me," fays the coachman, "I will fhoot with you five guineas a fhot."--"You be hanged," fays the other; "for five guineas you fhall fhoot at my a--."--"Done," fays the coachman; "I'll pepper you better than ever you was peppered by Jenny Bouncer."--"Pepper your grandmother," fays the other: "Here's Tow-woufe will let you fhoot at him for a fhilling a time."--"I know his honour better," cries Tow-woufe; "I never faw a furer fhot at a partridge. Every man miffes now and then; but if I could fhoot half as well as his honour, I would defire no better livelihood than I could get by my gun."--"Pox on you," faid the coachman, "you demolifh more game now than your head's worth. There's a bitch, Tow-woufe: by G-- fhe never blinked[A] a bird in her life."--"I have a puppy, not a year old, fhall hunt with her for a hundred," cries the other gentleman.--"Done," fays the coachman: "but you will be pox'd before you make the bett."--"If you have a mind for a bett," cries the coachman, "I will match my fpotted dog with your white bitch for a hundred, play or pay."--"Done," fays the other: "and I'll run Baldface againft Slouch with you for another."--"No," cries he from the box; "but I'll venture Mifs Jenny againft Baldface, or Hannibal either."--"Go to the devil," cries he from the coach: "I will make every bett your own way, to be fure! I will match Hannibal with Slouch for a thoufand, if you dare; and I fay done firft." [Footnote A: To blink is a term ufed to fignify the dog's paffing by a bird without pointing at it.] They were now arrived; and the reader will be very contented to leave them, and repair to the kitchen; where Barnabas, the furgeon, and an excifeman were fmoaking their pipes over fome cyder-and; and where the fervants, who attended the two noble gentlemen we have juft feen alight, were now arrived. "Tom," cries one of the footmen, "there's parfon Adams fmoaking his pipe in the gallery."--"Yes," fays Tom; "I pulled off my hat to him, and the parfon fpoke to me." "Is the gentleman a clergyman, then?" fays Barnabas (for his caffock had been tied up when he arrived). "Yes, fir," anfwered the footman; "and one there be but few like."--"Aye," faid Barnabas; "if I had known it fooner, I fhould have defired his company; I would always fhew a proper refpect for the cloth: but what fay you, doctor, fhall we adjourn into a room, and invite him to take part of a bowl of punch?" This propofal was immediately agreed to and executed; and parfon Adams accepting the invitation, much civility paffed between the two clergymen, who both declared the great honour they had for the cloth. They had not been long together before they entered into a difcourfe on fmall tithes, which continued a full hour, without the doctor or excifeman's having one opportunity to offer a word. It was then propofed to begin a general converfation, and the excifeman opened on foreign affairs; but a word unluckily dropping from one of them introduced a differtation on the hardfhips fuffered by the inferior clergy; which, after a long duration, concluded with bringing the nine volumes of fermons on the carpet. Barnabas greatly difcouraged poor Adams; he faid, "The age was fo wicked, that nobody read fermons: would you think it, Mr Adams?" faid he, "I once intended to print a volume of fermons myfelf, and they had the approbation of two or three bifhops; but what do you think a bookfeller offered me?"--"Twelve guineas perhaps," cried Adams.--"Not twelve pence, I affure you," anfwered Barnabas: "nay, the dog refufed me a Concordance in exchange. At laft I offered to give him the printing them, for the fake of dedicating them to that very gentleman who juft now drove his own coach into the inn; and, I affure you, he had the impudence to refufe my offer; by which means I loft a good living, that was afterwards given away in exchange for a pointer, to one who--but I will not fay anything againft the cloth. So you may guefs, Mr Adams, what you are to expect; for if fermons would have gone down, I believe--I will not be vain; but to be concife with you, three bifhops faid they were the beft that ever were writ: but indeed there are a pretty moderate number printed already, and not all fold yet."--"Pray, fir," faid Adams, "to what do you think the numbers may amount?"--"Sir," anfwered Barnabas, "a bookfeller told me, he believed five thoufand volumes at leaft."--"Five thoufand?" quoth the furgeon: "What can they be writ upon? I remember when I was a boy, I ufed to read one Tillotfon's fermons; and, I am fure, if a man practifed half fo much as is in one of thofe fermons, he will go to heaven."--"Doctor," cried Barnabas, "you have a prophane way of talking, for which I muft reprove you. A man can never have his duty too frequently inculcated into him. And as for Tillotfon, to be fure he was a good writer, and faid things very well; but comparifons are odious; another man may write as well as he--I believe there are fome of my fermons,"--and then he applied the candle to his pipe.--"And I believe there are fome of my difcourfes," cries Adams, "which the bifhops would not think totally unworthy of being printed; and I have been informed I might procure a very large fum (indeed an immenfe one) on them."--"I doubt that," anfwered Barnabas: "however, if you defire to make fome money of them, perhaps you may fell them by advertifing the manufcript fermons of a clergyman lately deceafed, all warranted originals, and never printed. And now I think of it, I fhould be obliged to you, if there be ever a funeral one among them, to lend it me; for I am this very day to preach a funeral fermon, for which I have not penned a line, though I am to have a double price."--Adams anfwered, "He had but one, which he feared would not ferve his purpofe, being facred to the memory of a magiftrate, who had exerted himfelf very fingularly in the prefervation of the morality of his neighbours, infomuch that he had neither alehoufe nor lewd woman in the parifh where he lived."--"No," replied Barnabas, "that will not do quite fo well; for the deceafed, upon whofe virtues I am to harangue, was a little too much addicted to liquor, and publickly kept a miftrefs.--I believe I muft take a common fermon, and truft to my memory to introduce fomething handfome on him."--"To your invention rather," faid the doctor: "your memory will be apter to put you out; for no man living remembers anything good of him." With fuch kind of fpiritual difcourfe, they emptied the bowl of punch, paid their reckoning, and feparated: Adams and the doctor went up to Jofeph, parfon Barnabas departed to celebrate the aforefaid deceafed, and the excifeman defcended into the cellar to gauge the veffels. Jofeph was now ready to fit down to a loin of mutton, and waited for Mr Adams, when he and the doctor came in. The doctor, having felt his pulfe and examined his wounds, declared him much better, which he imputed to that fanative foporiferous draught, a medicine "whofe virtues," he faid, "were never to be fufficiently extolled." And great indeed they muft be, if Jofeph was fo much indebted to them as the doctor imagined; fince nothing more than thofe effluvia which efcaped the cork could have contributed to his recovery; for the medicine had ftood untouched in the window ever fince its arrival. Jofeph paffed that day, and the three following, with his friend Adams, in which nothing fo remarkable happened as the fwift progrefs of his recovery. As he had an excellent habit of body, his wounds were now almoft healed; and his bruifes gave him fo little uneafinefs, that he preffed Mr Adams to let him depart; told him he fhould never be able to return fufficient thanks for all his favours, but begged that he might no longer delay his journey to London. Adams, notwithftanding the ignorance, as he conceived it, of Mr Tow-woufe, and the envy (for fuch he thought it) of Mr Barnabas, had great expectations from his fermons: feeing therefore Jofeph in fo good a way, he told him he would agree to his fetting out the next morning in the ftage-coach, that he believed he fhould have fufficient, after the reckoning paid, to procure him one day's conveyance in it, and afterwards he would be able to get on on foot, or might be favoured with a lift in fome neighbour's waggon, efpecially as there was then to be a fair in the town whither the coach would carry him, to which numbers from his parifh reforted--And as to himfelf, he agreed to proceed to the great city. They were now walking in the inn-yard, when a fat, fair, fhort perfon rode in, and, alighting from his horfe, went directly up to Barnabas, who was fmoaking his pipe on a bench. The parfon and the ftranger fhook one another very lovingly by the hand, and went into a room together. The evening now coming on, Jofeph retired to his chamber, whither the good Adams accompanied him, and took this opportunity to expatiate on the great mercies God had lately fhown him, of which he ought not only to have the deepeft inward fenfe, but likewife to exprefs outward thankfulnefs for them. They therefore fell both on their knees, and fpent a confiderable time in prayer and thankfgiving. They had juft finifhed when Betty came in and told Mr Adams Mr Barnabas defired to fpeak to him on fome bufinefs of confequence below-ftairs. Jofeph defired, if it was likely to detain him long, he would let him know it, that he might go to bed, which Adams promifed, and in that cafe they wifhed one another good-night. CHAPTER XVII. _A pleafant difcourfe between the two parfons and the bookfeller, which was broke off by an unlucky accident happening in the inn, which produced a dialogue between Mrs Tow-woufe and her maid of no gentle kind._ As foon as Adams came into the room, Mr Barnabas introduced him to the ftranger, who was, he told him, a bookfeller, and would be as likely to deal with him for his fermons as any man whatever. Adams, faluting the ftranger, anfwered Barnabas, that he was very much obliged to him; that nothing could be more convenient, for he had no other bufinefs to the great city, and was heartily defirous of returning with the young man, who was juft recovered of his miffortune. He then fnapt his fingers (as was ufual with him), and took two or three turns about the room in an extafy. And to induce the bookfeller to be as expeditious as poffible, as likewife to offer him a better price for his commodity, he affured them their meeting was extremely lucky to himfelf; for that he had the moft preffing occafion for money at that time, his own being almoft fpent, and having a friend then in the fame inn, who was juft recovered from fome wounds he had received from robbers, and was in a moft indigent condition. "So that nothing," fays he, "could be fo opportune for the fupplying both our neceffities as my making an immediate bargain with you." As foon as he had feated himfelf, the ftranger began in thefe words: "Sir, I do not care abfolutely to deny engaging in what my friend Mr Barnabas recommends; but fermons are mere drugs. The trade is fo vaftly ftocked with them, that really, unlefs they come out with the name of Whitefield or Wefley, or fome other fuch great man, as a bifhop, or thofe fort of people, I don't care to touch; unlefs now it was a fermon preached on the 30th of January; or we could fay in the title-page, publifhed at the earneft requeft of the congregation, or the inhabitants; but, truly, for a dry piece of fermons, I had rather be excufed; efpecially as my hands are fo full at prefent. However, fir, as Mr Barnabas mentioned them to me, I will, if you pleafe, take the manufcript with me to town, and fend you my opinion of it in a very fhort time." "Oh!" faid Adams, "if you defire it, I will read two or three difcourfes as a fpecimen." This Barnabas, who loved fermons no better than a grocer doth figs, immediately objected to, and advifed Adams to let the bookfeller have his fermons: telling him, "If he gave him a direction, he might be certain of a fpeedy anfwer;" adding, he need not fcruple trufting them in his poffeffion. "No," faid the bookfeller, "if it was a play that had been acted twenty nights together, I believe it would be fafe." Adams did not at all relifh the laft expreffion; he faid "he was forry to hear fermons compared to plays." "Not by me, I affure you," cried the bookfeller, "though I don't know whether the licenfing act may not fhortly bring them to the fame footing; but I have formerly known a hundred guineas given for a play."--"More fhame for thofe who gave it," cried Barnabas.--"Why fo?" faid the bookfeller, "for they got hundreds by it."--"But is there no difference between conveying good or ill inftructions to mankind?" faid Adams: "Would not an honeft mind rather lofe money by the one, than gain it by the other?"--"If you can find any fuch, I will not be their hindrance," anfwered the bookfeller; "but I think thofe perfons who get by preaching fermons are the propereft to lofe by printing them: for my part, the copy that fells beft will be always the beft copy in my opinion; I am no enemy to fermons, but becaufe they don't fell: for I would as foon print one of Whitefield's as any farce whatever." "Whoever prints fuch heterodox ftuff ought to be hanged," fays Barnabas. "Sir," faid he, turning to Adams, "this fellow's writings (I know not whether you have feen them) are levelled at the clergy. He would reduce us to the example of the primitive ages, forfooth! and would infinuate to the people that a clergyman ought to be always preaching and praying. He pretends to underftand the Scripture literally; and would make mankind believe that the poverty and low eftate which was recommended to the Church in its infancy, and was only temporary doctrine adapted to her under perfecution, was to be preferved in her flourifhing and eftablifhed ftate. Sir, the principles of Toland, Woolfton, and all the freethinkers, are not calculated to do half the mifchief, as thofe profeffed by this fellow and his followers." "Sir," anfwered Adams, "if Mr Whitefield had carried his doctrine no farther than you mention, I fhould have remained, as I once was, his well-wifher. I am, myfelf, as great an enemy to the luxury and fplendour of the clergy as he can be. I do not, more than he, by the flourifhing eftate of the Church, underftand the palaces, equipages, drefs, furniture, rich dainties, and vaft fortunes, of her minifters. Surely thofe things, which favour fo ftrongly of this world, become not the fervants of one who profeffed His kingdom was not of it. But when he began to call nonfenfe and enthufiafm to his aid, and fet up the deteftable doctrine of faith againft good works, I was his friend no longer; for furely that doctrine was coined in hell; and one would think none but the devil himfelf could have the confidence to preach it. For can anything be more derogatory to the honour of God than for men to imagine that the all-wife Being will hereafter fay to the good and virtuous, 'Notwithftanding the purity of thy life, notwithftanding that conftant rule of virtue and goodnefs in which you walked upon earth, ftill, as thou didft not believe everything in the true orthodox manner, thy want of faith fhall condemn thee?' Or, on the other fide, can any doctrine have a more pernicious influence on fociety, than a perfuafion that it will be a good plea for the villain at the laft day--'Lord, it is true I never obeyed one of thy commandments, yet punifh me not, for I believe them all?'"--"I fuppofe, fir," faid the bookfeller, "your fermons are of a different kind."--"Aye, fir," faid Adams; "the contrary, I thank Heaven, is inculcated in almoft every page, or I fhould belye my own opinion, which hath always been, that a virtuous and good Turk, or heathen, are more acceptable in the fight of their Creator than a vicious and wicked Chriftian, though his faith was as perfectly orthodox as St Paul's himfelf."--"I wifh you fuccefs," fays the bookfeller, "but muft beg to be excufed, as my hands are fo very full at prefent; and, indeed, I am afraid you will find a backwardnefs in the trade to engage in a book which the clergy would be certain to cry down."--"God forbid," fays Adams, "any books fhould be propagated which the clergy would cry down; but if you mean by the clergy, fome few defigning factious men, who have it at heart to eftablifh fome favourite fchemes at the price of the liberty of mankind, and the very effence of religion, it is not in the power of fuch perfons to decry any book they pleafe; witnefs that excellent book called, 'A Plain Account of the Nature and End of the Sacrament;' a book written (if I may venture on the expreffion) with the pen of an angel, and calculated to reftore the true ufe of Chriftianity, and of that facred inftitution; for what could tend more to the noble purpofes of religion than frequent chearful meetings among the members of a fociety, in which they fhould, in the prefence of one another, and in the fervice of the Supreme Being, make promifes of being good, friendly, and benevolent to each other? Now, this excellent book was attacked by a party, but unfuccefffully." At thefe words Barnabas fell a-ringing with all the violence imaginable; upon which a fervant attending, he bid him "bring a bill immediately; for that he was in company, for aught he knew, with the devil himfelf; and he expected to hear the Alcoran, the Leviathan, or Woolfton commended, if he ftaid a few minutes longer." Adams defired, "as he was fo much moved at his mentioning a book which he did without apprehending any poffibility of offence, that he would be fo kind to propofe any objections he had to it, which he would endeavour to anfwer."--"I propofe objections!" faid Barnabas, "I never read a fyllable in any fuch wicked book; I never faw it in my life, I affure you."--Adams was going to anfwer, when a moft hideous uproar began in the inn. Mrs Tow-woufe, Mr Tow-woufe, and Betty, all lifting up their voices together; but Mrs Tow-woufe's voice, like a bafs viol in a concert, was clearly and diftinctly diftinguifhed among the reft, and was heard to articulate the following founds:--"O you damn'd villain! is this the return to all the care I have taken of your family? This the reward of my virtue? Is this the manner in which you behave to one who brought you a fortune, and preferred you to fo many matches, all your betters? To abufe my bed, my own bed, with my own fervant! but I'll maul the flut, I'll tear her nafty eyes out! Was ever fuch a pitiful dog, to take up with fuch a mean trollop? If fhe had been a gentlewoman, like myfelf, it had been fome excufe; but a beggarly, faucy, dirty fervant-maid. Get you out of my houfe, you whore." To which fhe added another name, which we do not care to ftain our paper with. It was a monofyllable beginning with a b--, and indeed was the fame as if fhe had pronounced the words, fhe-dog. Which term we fhall, to avoid offence, ufe on this occafion, though indeed both the miftrefs and maid uttered the above-mentioned b--, a word extremely difguftful to females of the lower fort. Betty had borne all hitherto with patience, and had uttered only lamentations; but the laft appellation ftung her to the quick. "I am a woman as well as yourfelf," fhe roared out, "and no fhe-dog; and if I have been a little naughty, I am not the firft; if I have been no better than I fhould be," cries fhe, fobbing, "that's no reafon you fhould call me out of my name; my be-betters are wo-rfe than me."--"Huzzy, huzzy," fays Mrs Tow-woufe, "have you the impudence to anfwer me? Did I not catch you, you faucy"--and then again repeated the terrible word fo odious to female ears. "I can't bear that name," anfwered Betty: "if I have been wicked, I am to anfwer for it myfelf in the other world; but I have done nothing that's unnatural; and I will go out of your houfe this moment, for I will never be called fhe-dog by any miftrefs in England." Mrs Tow-woufe then armed herfelf with the fpit, but was prevented from executing any dreadful purpofe by Mr Adams, who confined her arms with the ftrength of a wrift which Hercules would not have been afhamed of. Mr Tow-woufe, being caught, as our lawyers exprefs it, with the manner, and having no defence to make, very prudently withdrew himfelf; and Betty committed herfelf to the protection of the hoftler, who, though fhe could not conceive him pleafed with what had happened, was, in her opinion, rather a gentler beaft than her miftrefs. Mrs Tow-woufe, at the interceffion of Mr Adams, and finding the enemy vanifhed, began to compofe herfelf, and at length recovered the ufual ferenity of her temper, in which we will leave her, to open to the reader the fteps which led to a cataftrophe, common enough, and comical enough too perhaps, in modern hiftory, yet often fatal to the repofe and well-being of families, and the fubject of many tragedies, both in life and on the ftage. CHAPTER XVIII. _The hiftory of Betty the chambermaid, and an account of what occafioned the violent fcene in the preceding chapter._ Betty, who was the occafion of all this hurry, had fome good qualities. She had good-nature, generofity, and compaffion, but unfortunately, her conftitution was compofed of thofe warm ingredients which, though the purity of courts or nunneries might have happily controuled them, were by no means able to endure the ticklifh fituation of a chambermaid at an inn; who is daily liable to the folicitations of lovers of all complexions; to the dangerous addreffes of fine gentlemen of the army, who fometimes are obliged to refide with them a whole year together; and, above all, are expofed to the careffes of footmen, ftage-coachmen, and drawers; all of whom employ the whole artillery of kiffing, flattering, bribing, and every other weapon which is to be found in the whole armoury of love, againft them. Betty, who was but one-and-twenty, had now lived three years in this dangerous fituation, during which fhe had efcaped pretty well. An enfign of foot was the firft perfon who made an impreffion on her heart; he did indeed raife a flame in her which required the care of a furgeon to cool. While fhe burnt for him, feveral others burnt for her. Officers of the army, young gentlemen travelling the weftern circuit, inoffenfive fquires, and fome of graver character, were fet a-fire by her charms! At length, having perfectly recovered the effects of her firft unhappy paffion, fhe feemed to have vowed a ftate of perpetual chaftity. She was long deaf to all the fufferings of her lovers, till one day, at a neighbouring fair, the rhetoric of John the hoftler, with a new ftraw hat and a pint of wine, made a fecond conqueft over her. She did not, however, feel any of thofe flames on this occafion which had been the confequence of her former amour; nor, indeed, thofe other ill effects which prudent young women very juftly apprehend from too abfolute an indulgence to the preffing endearments of their lovers. This latter, perhaps, was a little owing to her not being entirely conftant to John, with whom fhe permitted Tom Whipwell the ftage-coachman, and now and then a handfome young traveller, to fhare her favours. Mr Tow-woufe had for fome time caft the languifhing eyes of affection on this young maiden. He had laid hold on every opportunity of faying tender things to her, fqueezing her by the hand, and fometimes kiffing her lips; for, as the violence of his paffion had confiderably abated to Mrs Tow-woufe, fo, like water, which is ftopt from its ufual current in one place, it naturally fought a vent in another. Mrs Tow-woufe is thought to have perceived this abatement, and, probably, it added very little to the natural fweetnefs of her temper; for though fhe was as true to her hufband as the dial to the fun, fhe was rather more defirous of being fhone on, as being more capable of feeling his warmth. Ever fince Jofeph's arrival, Betty had conceived an extraordinary liking to him, which difcovered itfelf more and more as he grew better and better; till that fatal evening, when, as fhe was warming his bed, her paffion grew to fuch a height, and fo perfectly maftered both her modefty and her reafon, that, after many fruitlefs hints and fly infinuations, fhe at laft threw down the warming-pan, and, embracing him with great eagernefs, fwore he was the handfomeft creature fhe had ever feen. Jofeph, in great confufion, leapt from her, and told her he was forry to fee a young woman caft off all regard to modefty; but fhe had gone too far to recede, and grew fo very indecent, that Jofeph was obliged, contrary to his inclination, to ufe fome violence to her; and, taking her in his arms, he fhut her out of the room, and locked the door. How ought man to rejoice that his chaftity is always in his own power; that, if he hath fufficient ftrength of mind, he hath always a competent ftrength of body to defend himfelf, and cannot, like a poor weak woman, be ravifhed againft his will! Betty was in the moft violent agitation at this difappointment. Rage and luft pulled her heart, as with two ftrings, two different ways; one moment fhe thought of ftabbing Jofeph; the next, of taking him in her arms, and devouring him with kiffes; but the latter paffion was far more prevalent. Then fhe thought of revenging his refufal on herfelf; but, whilft fhe was engaged in this meditation, happily death prefented himfelf to her in fo many fhapes, of drowning, hanging, poifoning, &c., that her diftracted mind could refolve on none. In this perturbation of fpirit, it accidentally occurred to her memory that her mafter's bed was not made; fhe therefore went directly to his room, where he happened at that time to be engaged at his bureau. As foon as fhe faw him, fhe attempted to retire; but he called her back, and, taking her by the hand, fqueezed her fo tenderly, at the fame time whifpering fo many foft things into her ears, and then preffed her fo clofely with his kiffes, that the vanquifhed fair one, whofe paffions were already raifed, and which were not fo whimfically capricious that one man only could lay them, though, perhaps, fhe would have rather preferred that one--the vanquifhed fair one quietly fubmitted, I fay, to her mafter's will, who had juft attained the accomplifhment of his blifs when Mrs Tow-woufe unexpectedly entered the room, and caufed all that confufion which we have before feen, and which it is not neceffary, at prefent, to take any farther notice of; fince, without the affiftance of a fingle hint from us, every reader of any fpeculation or experience, though not married himfelf, may eafily conjecture that it concluded with the difcharge of Betty, the fubmiffion of Mr Tow-woufe, with fome things to be performed on his fide by way of gratitude for his wife's goodnefs in being reconciled to him, with many hearty promifes never to offend any more in the like manner; and, laftly, his quietly and contentedly bearing to be reminded of his tranfgreffions, as a kind of penance, once or twice a day during the refidue of his life. BOOK II. CHAPTER I. _Of Divifions in Authors_. There are certain myfteries or fecrets in all trades, from the higheft to the loweft, from that of prime-miniftering to this of authoring, which are feldom difcovered unlefs to members of the fame calling. Among thofe ufed by us gentlemen of the latter occupation, I take this of dividing our works into books and chapters to be none of the leaft confiderable. Now, for want of being truly acquainted with this fecret, common readers imagine, that by this art of dividing we mean only to fwell our works to a much larger bulk than they would otherwife be extended to. Thefe feveral places therefore in our paper, which are filled with our books and chapters, are underftood as fo much buckram, ftays, and ftay-tape in a taylor's bill, ferving only to make up the fum total, commonly found at the bottom of our firft page and of his laft. But in reality the cafe is otherwife, and in this as well as all other inftances we confult the advantage of our reader, not our own; and indeed, many notable ufes arife to him from this method; for, firft, thofe little fpaces between our chapters may be looked upon as an inn or refting-place where he may ftop and take a glafs or any other refrefhment as it pleafes him. Nay, our fine readers will, perhaps, be fcarce able to travel farther than through one of them in a day. As to thofe vacant pages which are placed between our books, they are to be regarded as thofe ftages where in long journies the traveller ftays fome time to repofe himfelf, and confider of what he hath feen in the parts he hath already paffed through; a confideration which I take the liberty to recommend a little to the reader; for, however fwift his capacity may be, I would not advife him to travel through thefe pages too faft; for if he doth, he may probably mifs the feeing fome curious productions of nature, which will be obferved by the flower and more accurate reader. A volume without any fuch places of reft refembles the opening of wilds or feas, which tires the eye and fatigues the fpirit when entered upon. Secondly, what are the contents prefixed to every chapter but fo many infcriptions over the gates of inns (to continue the fame metaphor), informing the reader what entertainment he is to expect, which if he likes not, he may travel on to the next; for, in biography, as we are not tied down to an exact concatenation equally with other hiftorians, fo a chapter or two (for inftance, this I am now writing) may be often paffed over without any injury to the whole. And in thefe infcriptions I have been as faithful as poffible, not imitating the celebrated Montaigne, who promifes you one thing and gives you another; nor fome title-page authors, who promife a great deal and produce nothing at all. There are, befides thefe more obvious benefits, feveral others which our readers enjoy from this art of dividing; though perhaps moft of them too myfterious to be prefently underftood by any who are not initiated into the fcience of authoring. To mention, therefore, but one which is moft obvious, it prevents fpoiling the beauty of a book by turning down its leaves, a method otherwife neceffary to thofe readers who (though they read with great improvement and advantage) are apt, when they return to their ftudy after half-an-hour's abfence, to forget where they left off. Thefe divifions have the fanction of great antiquity. Homer not only divided his great work into twenty-four books (in compliment perhaps to the twenty-four letters to which he had very particular obligations), but, according to the opinion of fome very fagacious critics, hawked them all feparately, delivering only one book at a time (probably by fubfcription). He was the firft inventor of the art which hath fo long lain dormant, of publifhing by numbers; an art now brought to fuch perfection, that even dictionaries are divided and exhibited piecemeal to the public; nay, one bookfeller hath (to encourage learning and eafe the public) contrived to give them a dictionary in this divided manner for only fifteen fhillings more than it would have coft entire. Virgil hath given us his poem in twelve books, an argument of his modefty; for by that, doubtlefs, he would infinuate that he pretends to no more than half the merit of the Greek; for the fame reafon, our Milton went originally no farther than ten; till, being puffed up by the praife of his friends, he put himfelf on the fame footing with the Roman poet. I fhall not, however, enter fo deep into this matter as fome very learned criticks have done; who have with infinite labour and acute difcernment difcovered what books are proper for embellifhment, and what require fimplicity only, particularly with regard to fimiles, which I think are now generally agreed to become any book but the firft. I will difmifs this chapter with the following obfervation: that it becomes an author generally to divide a book, as it does a butcher to joint his meat, for fuch affiftance is of great help to both the reader and the carver. And now, having indulged myfelf a little, I will endeavour to indulge the curiofity of my reader, who is no doubt impatient to know what he will find in the fubfequent chapters of this book. CHAPTER II. _A furprizing inftance of Mr Adams's fhort memory, with the unfortunate confequences which it brought on Jofeph._ Mr Adams and Jofeph were now ready to depart different ways, when an accident determined the former to return with his friend, which Tow-woufe, Barnabas, and the bookfeller had not been able to do. This accident was, that thofe fermons, which the parfon was travelling to London to publifh, were, O my good reader! left behind; what he had miftaken for them in the faddlebags being no other than three fhirts, a pair of fhoes, and fome other neceffaries, which Mrs Adams, who thought her hufband would want fhirts more than fermons on his journey, had carefully provided him. This difcovery was now luckily owing to the prefence of Jofeph at the opening the faddlebags; who, having heard his friend fay he carried with him nine volumes of fermons, and not being of that fect of philofophers who can reduce all the matter of the world into a nutfhell, feeing there was no room for them in the bags, where the parfon had faid they were depofited, had the curiofity to cry out, "Blefs me, fir, where are your fermons?" The parfon anfwered, "There, there, child; there they are, under my fhirts." Now it happened that he had taken forth his laft fhirt, and the vehicle remained vifibly empty. "Sure, fir," fays Jofeph, "there is nothing in the bags." Upon which Adams, ftarting, and teftifying fome furprize, cried, "Hey! fie, fie upon it! they are not here fure enough. Ay, they are certainly left behind." Jofeph was greatly concerned at the uneafinefs which he apprehended his friend muft feel from this difappointment; he begged him to purfue his journey, and promifed he would himfelf return with the books to him with the utmoft expedition. "No, thank you, child," anfwered Adams; "it fhall not be fo. What would it avail me, to tarry in the great city, unlefs I had my difcourfes with me, which are _ut ita dicam_, the fole caufe, the _aitia monotate_ of my peregrination? No, child, as this accident hath happened, I am refolved to return back to my cure, together with you; which indeed my inclination fufficiently leads me to. This difappointment may perhaps be intended for my good." He concluded with a verfe out of Theocritus, which fignifies no more than that fometimes it rains, and fometimes the fun fhines. Jofeph bowed with obedience and thankfulnefs for the inclination which the parfon expreffed of returning with him; and now the bill was called for, which, on examination, amounted within a fhilling to the fum Mr Adams had in his pocket. Perhaps the reader may wonder how he was able to produce a fufficient fum for fo many days: that he may not be furprized, therefore, it cannot be unneceffary to acquaint him that he had borrowed a guinea of a fervant belonging to the coach and fix, who had been formerly one of his parifhioners, and whofe mafter, the owner of the coach, then lived within three miles of him; for fo good was the credit of Mr Adams, that even Mr Peter, the Lady Booby's fteward, would have lent him a guinea with very little fecurity. [Illuftration] Mr Adams difcharged the bill, and they were both fetting out, having agreed to ride and tie; a method of travelling much ufed by perfons who have but one horfe between them, and is thus performed. The two travellers fet out together, one on horfeback, the other on foot: now, as it generally happens that he on horfeback outgoes him on foot, the cuftom is, that, when he arrives at the diftance agreed on, he is to difmount, tie the horfe to fome gate, tree, poft, or other thing, and then proceed on foot; when the other comes up to the horfe he unties him, mounts, and gallops on, till, having paffed by his fellow-traveller, he likewife arrives at the place of tying. And this is that method of travelling fo much in ufe among our prudent anceftors, who knew that horfes had mouths as well as legs, and that they could not ufe the latter without being at the expenfe of fuffering the beafts themfelves to ufe the former. This was the method in ufe in thofe days when, inftead of a coach and fix, a member of parliament's lady ufed to mount a pillion behind her hufband; and a grave ferjeant at law condefcended to amble to Weftminfter on an eafy pad, with his clerk kicking his heels behind him. Adams was now gone fome minutes, having infifted on Jofeph's beginning the journey on horfeback, and Jofeph had his foot in the ftirrup, when the hoftler prefented him a bill for the horfe's board during his refidence at the inn. Jofeph faid Mr Adams had paid all; but this matter, being referred to Mr Tow-woufe, was by him decided in favour of the hoftler, and indeed with truth and juftice; for this was a frefh inftance of that fhortnefs of memory which did not arife from want of parts, but that continual hurry in which parfon Adams was always involved. Jofeph was now reduced to a dilemma which extremely puzzled him. The fum due for horfe-meat was twelve fhillings (for Adams, who had borrowed the beaft of his clerk, had ordered him to be fed as well as they could feed him), and the cafh in his pocket amounted to fixpence (for Adams had divided the laft fhilling with him). Now, though there have been fome ingenious perfons who have contrived to pay twelve fhillings with fixpence, Jofeph was not one of them. He had never contracted a debt in his life, and was confequently the lefs ready at an expedient to extricate himfelf. Tow-woufe was willing to give him credit till next time, to which Mrs Tow-woufe would probably have confented (for fuch was Jofeph's beauty, that it had made fome impreffion even on that piece of flint which that good woman wore in her bofom by way of heart). Jofeph would have found, therefore, very likely the paffage free, had he not, when he honeftly difcovered the nakednefs of his pockets, pulled out that little piece of gold which we have mentioned before. This caufed Mrs Tow-woufe's eyes to water; fhe told Jofeph fhe did not conceive a man could want money whilft he had gold in his pocket. Jofeph anfwered he had fuch a value for that little piece of gold, that he would not part with it for a hundred times the riches which the greateft efquire in the county was worth. "A pretty way, indeed," faid Mrs Tow-woufe, "to run in debt, and then refufe to part with your money, becaufe you have a value for it! I never knew any piece of gold of more value than as many fhillings as it would change for."--"Not to preferve my life from ftarving, nor to redeem it from a robber, would I part with this dear piece!" anfwered Jofeph. "What," fays Mrs Tow-woufe, "I fuppofe it was given you by fome vile trollop, fome mifs or other; if it had been the prefent of a virtuous woman, you would not have had fuch a value for it. My hufband is a fool if he parts with the horfe without being paid for him."--"No, no, I can't part with the horfe, indeed, till I have the money," cried Tow-woufe. A refolution highly commended by a lawyer then in the yard, who declared Mr Tow-woufe might juftify the detainer. As we cannot therefore at prefent get Mr Jofeph out of the inn, we fhall leave him in it, and carry our reader on after parfon Adams, who, his mind being perfectly at eafe, fell into a contemplation on a paffage in Aefchylus, which entertained him for three miles together, without fuffering him once to reflect on his fellow-traveller. At length, having fpun out his thread, and being now at the fummit of a hill, he caft his eyes backwards, and wondered that he could not fee any fign of Jofeph. As he left him ready to mount the horfe, he could not apprehend any mifchief had happened, neither could he fufpect that he miffed his way, it being fo broad and plain; the only reafon which prefented itfelf to him was, that he had met with an acquaintance who had prevailed with him to delay fome time in difcourfe. He therefore refolved to proceed flowly forwards, not doubting but that he fhould be fhortly overtaken; and foon came to a large water, which, filling the whole road, he faw no method of paffing unlefs by wading through, which he accordingly did up to his middle; but was no fooner got to the other fide than he perceived, if he had looked over the hedge, he would have found a footpath capable of conducting him without wetting his fhoes. His furprize at Jofeph's not coming up grew now very troublefome: he began to fear he knew not what; and as he determined to move no farther, and, if he did not fhortly overtake him, to return back, he wifhed to find a houfe of public entertainment where he might dry his clothes and refrefh himfelf with a pint; but, feeing no fuch (for no other reafon than becaufe he did not caft his eyes a hundred yards forwards), he fat himfelf down on a ftile, and pulled out his Aefchylus. A fellow paffing prefently by, Adams afked him if he could direct him to an alehoufe. The fellow, who had juft left it, and perceived the houfe and fign to be within fight, thinking he had jeered him, and being of a morofe temper, bade him follow his nofe and be d---n'd. Adams told him he was a faucy jackanapes; upon which the fellow turned about angrily; but, perceiving Adams clench his fift, he thought proper to go on without taking any farther notice. A horfeman, following immediately after, and being afked the fame queftion, anfwered, "Friend, there is one within a ftone's throw; I believe you may fee it before you." Adams, lifting up his eyes, cried, "I proteft, and fo there is;" and, thanking his informer, proceeded directly to it. CHAPTER III. _The opinion of two lawyers concerning the fame gentleman, with Mr Adams's inquiry into the religion of his hoft._ He had juft entered the houfe, and called for his pint, and feated himfelf, when two horfemen came to the door, and, faftening their horfes to the rails, alighted. They faid there was a violent fhower of rain coming on, which they intended to weather there, and went into a little room by themfelves, not perceiving Mr Adams. One of thefe immediately afked the other, "If he had feen a more comical adventure a great while?" Upon which the other faid, "He doubted whether, by law, the landlord could juftify detaining the horfe for his corn and hay." But the former anfwered, "Undoubtedly he can; it is an adjudged cafe, and I have known it tried." Adams, who, though he was, as the reader may fufpect, a little inclined to forgetfulnefs, never wanted more than a hint to remind him, overhearing their difcourfe, immediately fuggefted to himfelf that this was his own horfe, and that he had forgot to pay for him, which, upon inquiry, he was certified of by the gentlemen; who added, that the horfe was likely to have more reft than food, unlefs he was paid for. The poor parfon refolved to return prefently to the inn, though he knew no more than Jofeph how to procure his horfe his liberty; he was, however, prevailed on to ftay under covert, till the fhower, which was now very violent, was over. The three travellers then fat down together over a mug of good beer; when Adams, who had obferved a gentleman's houfe as he paffed along the road, inquired to whom it belonged; one of the horfemen had no fooner mentioned the owner's name, than the other began to revile him in the moft opprobrious terms. The Englifh language fcarce affords a fingle reproachful word, which he did not vent on this occafion. He charged him likewife with many particular facts. He faid, "He no more regarded a field of wheat when he was hunting, than he did the highway; that he had injured feveral poor farmers by trampling their corn under his horfe's heels; and if any of them begged him with the utmoft fubmiffion to refrain, his horfewhip was always ready to do them juftice." He faid, "That he was the greateft tyrant to the neighbours in every other inftance, and would not fuffer a farmer to keep a gun, though he might juftify it by law; and in his own family fo cruel a mafter, that he never kept a fervant a twelvemonth. In his capacity as a juftice," continued he, "he behaves fo partially, that he commits or acquits juft as he is in the humour, without any regard to truth or evidence; the devil may carry any one before him for me; I would rather be tried before fome judges, than be a profecutor before him: if I had an eftate in the neighbourhood, I would fell it for half the value rather than live near him." Adams fhook his head, and faid, "He was forry fuch men were fuffered to proceed with impunity, and that riches could fet any man above the law." The reviler, a little after, retiring into the yard, the gentleman who had firft mentioned his name to Adams began to affure him "that his companion was a prejudiced perfon. It is true," fays he, "perhaps, that he may have fometimes purfued his game over a field of corn, but he hath always made the party ample fatiffaction: that fo far from tyrannifing over his neighbours, or taking away their guns, he himfelf knew feveral farmers not qualified, who not only kept guns, but killed game with them; that he was the beft of mafters to his fervants, and feveral of them had grown old in his fervice; that he was the beft juftice of peace in the kingdom, and, to his certain knowledge, had decided many difficult points, which were referred to him, with the greateft equity and the higheft wifdom; and he verily believed, feveral perfons would give a year's purchafe more for an eftate near him, than under the wings of any other great man." He had juft finifhed his encomium when his companion returned and acquainted him the ftorm was over. Upon which they prefently mounted their horfes and departed. Adams, who was in the utmoft anxiety at thofe different characters of the fame perfon, afked his hoft if he knew the gentleman: for he began to imagine they had by miftake been fpeaking of two feveral gentlemen. "No, no, mafter," anfwered the hoft (a fhrewd, cunning fellow); "I know the gentleman very well of whom they have been fpeaking, as I do the gentlemen who fpoke of him. As for riding over other men's corn, to my knowledge he hath not been on horfeback thefe two years. I never heard he did any injury of that kind; and as to making reparation, he is not fo free of his money as that comes to neither. Nor did I ever hear of his taking away any man's gun; nay, I know feveral who have guns in their houfes; but as for killing game with them, no man is ftricter; and I believe he would ruin any who did. You heard one of the gentlemen fay he was the worft mafter in the world, and the other that he is the beft; but for my own part, I know all his fervants, and never heard from any of them that he was either one or the other."--"Aye! aye!" fays Adams; "and how doth he behave as a juftice, pray?"--"Faith, friend," anfwered the hoft, "I queftion whether he is in the commiffion; the only caufe I have heard he hath decided a great while, was one between thofe very two perfons who juft went out of this houfe; and I am fure he determined that juftly, for I heard the whole matter."--"Which did He decide it in favour of?" quoth Adams.--"I think I need not anfwer that queftion," cried the hoft, "after the different characters you have heard of him. It is not my bufinefs to contradict gentlemen while they are drinking in my houfe; but I knew neither of them fpoke a fyllable of truth."--"God forbid!" faid Adams, "that men fhould arrive at fuch a pitch of wickednefs to belye the character of their neighbour from a little private affection, or, what is infinitely worfe, a private fpite. I rather believe we have miftaken them, and they mean two other perfons; for there are many houfes on the road."--"Why, prithee, friend," cries the hoft, "doft thou pretend never to have told a lye in thy life?"--"Never a malicious one, I am certain," anfwered Adams, "nor with a defign to injure the reputation of any man living."--"Pugh! malicious; no, no," replied the hoft; "not malicious with a defign to hang a man, or bring him into trouble; but furely, out of love to onefelf, one muft fpeak better of a friend than an enemy."--"Out of love to yourfelf, you fhould confine yourfelf to truth," fays Adams, "for by doing otherwife you injure the nobleft part of yourfelf, your immortal foul. I can hardly believe any man fuch an idiot to rifque the lofs of that by any trifling gain, and the greateft gain in this world is but dirt in comparifon of what fhall be revealed hereafter." Upon which the hoft, taking up the cup, with a fmile, drank a health to hereafter; adding, "He was for fomething prefent."--"Why," fays Adams very gravely, "do not you believe another world?" To which the hoft anfwered, "Yes; he was no atheift."--"And you believe you have an immortal foul?" cries Adams. He anfwered, "God forbid he fhould not."--"And heaven and hell?" faid the parfon. The hoft then bid him "not to profane; for thofe were things not to be mentioned nor thought of but in church." Adams afked him, "Why he went to church, if what he learned there had no influence on his conduct in life?" "I go to church," anfwered the hoft, "to fay my prayers and behave godly."--"And doft not thou," cried Adams, "believe what thou heareft at church?"--"Moft part of it, mafter," returned the hoft. "And doft not thou then tremble," cries Adams, "at the thought of eternal punifhment?"--"As for that, mafter," faid he, "I never once thought about it; but what fignifies talking about matters fo far off? The mug is out, fhall I draw another?" Whilft he was going for that purpofe, a ftage-coach drove up to the door. The coachman coming into the houfe was afked by the miftrefs what paffengers he had in his coach? "A parcel of fquinny-gut b--s," fays he; "I have a good mind to overturn them; you won't prevail upon them to drink anything, I affure you." Adams afked him, "If he had not feen a young man on horfeback on the road" (defcribing Jofeph). "Aye," faid the coachman, "a gentlewoman in my coach that is his acquaintance redeemed him and his horfe; he would have been here before this time, had not the ftorm driven him to fhelter." "God blefs her!" faid Adams, in a rapture; nor could he delay walking out to fatiffy himfelf who this charitable woman was; but what was his furprize when he faw his old acquaintance, Madam Slipflop? Hers indeed was not fo great, becaufe fhe had been informed by Jofeph that he was on the road. Very civil were the falutations on both fides; and Mrs Slipflop rebuked the hoftefs for denying the gentleman to be there when fhe afked for him; but indeed the poor woman had not erred defignedly; for Mrs Slipflop afked for a clergyman, and fhe had unhappily miftaken Adams for a perfon travelling to a neighbouring fair with the thimble and button, or fome other fuch operation; for he marched in a fwinging great but fhort white coat with black buttons, a fhort wig, and a hat which, fo far from having a black hatband, had nothing black about it. Jofeph was now come up, and Mrs Slipflop would have had him quit his horfe to the parfon, and come himfelf into the coach; but he abfolutely refufed, faying, he thanked Heaven he was well enough recovered to be very able to ride; and added, he hoped he knew his duty better than to ride in a coach while Mr Adams was on horfeback. Mrs Slipflop would have perfifted longer, had not a lady in the coach put a fhort end to the difpute, by refufing to fuffer a fellow in a livery to ride in the fame coach with herfelf; fo it was at length agreed that Adams fhould fill the vacant place in the coach, and Jofeph fhould proceed on horfeback. They had not proceeded far before Mrs Slipflop, addreffing herfelf to the parfon, fpoke thus:--"There hath been a ftrange alteration in our family, Mr Adams, fince Sir Thomas's death." "A ftrange alteration indeed," fays Adams, "as I gather from fome hints which have dropped from Jofeph."--"Aye," fays fhe, "I could never have believed it; but the longer one lives in the world, the more one fees. So Jofeph hath given you hints." "But of what nature will always remain a perfect fecret with me," cries the parfon: "he forced me to promife before he would communicate anything. I am indeed concerned to find her ladyfhip behave in fo unbecoming a manner. I always thought her in the main a good lady, and fhould never have fufpected her of thoughts fo unworthy a Chriftian, and with a young lad her own fervant." "Thefe things are no fecrets to me, I affure you," cries Slipflop, "and I believe they will be none anywhere fhortly; for ever fince the boy's departure, fhe hath behaved more like a mad woman than anything elfe." "Truly, I am heartily concerned," fays Adams, "for fhe was a good fort of a lady. Indeed, I have often wifhed fhe had attended a little more conftantly at the fervice, but fhe hath done a great deal of good in the parifh." "O Mr Adams," fays Slipflop, "people that don't fee all, often know nothing. Many things have been given away in our family, I do affure you, without her knowledge. I have heard you fay in the pulpit we ought not to brag; but indeed I can't avoid faying, if fhe had kept the keys herfelf, the poor would have wanted many a cordial which I have let them have. As for my late mafter, he was as worthy a man as ever lived, and would have done infinite good if he had not been controlled; but he loved a quiet life, Heaven reft his foul! I am confident he is there, and enjoys a quiet life, which fome folks would not allow him here."--Adams anfwered, "He had never heard this before, and was miftaken if fhe herfelf (for he remembered fhe ufed to commend her miftrefs and blame her mafter) had not formerly been of another opinion." "I don't know," replied fhe, "what I might once think; but now I am confidous matters are as I tell you; the world will fhortly fee who hath been deceived; for my part, I fay nothing, but that it is wonderfome how fome people can carry all things with a grave face." Thus Mr Adams and fhe difcourfed, till they came oppofite to a great houfe which ftood at fome diftance from the road: a lady in the coach, fpying it, cried, "Yonder lives the unfortunate Leonora, if one can juftly call a woman unfortunate whom we muft own at the fame time guilty and the author of her own calamity." This was abundantly fufficient to awaken the curiofity of Mr Adams, as indeed it did that of the whole company, who jointly folicited the lady to acquaint them with Leonora's hiftory, fince it feemed, by what fhe had faid, to contain fomething remarkable. The lady, who was perfectly well-bred, did not require many entreaties, and having only wifhed their entertainment might make amends for the company's attention, fhe began in the following manner. CHAPTER IV. _The hiftory of Leonora, or the unfortunate jilt._ Leonora was the daughter of a gentleman of fortune; fhe was tall and well-fhaped, with a fprightlinefs in her countenance which often attracts beyond more regular features joined with an infipid air: nor is this kind of beauty lefs apt to deceive than allure; the good humour which it indicates being often miftaken for good nature, and the vivacity for true underftanding. Leonora, who was now at the age of eighteen, lived with an aunt of hers in a town in the north of England. She was an extreme lover of gaiety, and very rarely miffed a ball or any other public affembly; where fhe had frequent opportunities of fatiffying a greedy appetite of vanity, with the preference which was given her by the men to almoft every other woman prefent. Among many young fellows who were particular in their gallantries towards her, Horatio foon diftinguifhed himfelf in her eyes beyond all his competitors; fhe danced with more than ordinary gaiety when he happened to be her partner; neither the fairnefs of the evening, nor the mufick of the nightingale, could lengthen her walk like his company. She affected no longer to underftand the civilities of others; whilft fhe inclined fo attentive an ear to every compliment of Horatio, that fhe often fmiled even when it was too delicate for her comprehenfion. "Pray, madam," fays Adams, "who was this fquire Horatio?" Horatio, fays the lady, was a young gentleman of a good family, bred to the law, and had been fome few years called to the degree of a barrifter. His face and perfon were fuch as the generality allowed handfome; but he had a dignity in his air very rarely to be feen. His temper was of the faturnine complexion, and without the leaft taint of morofenefs. He had wit and humour, with an inclination to fatire, which he indulged rather too much. This gentleman, who had contracted the moft violent paffion for Leonora, was the laft perfon who perceived the probability of its fuccefs. The whole town had made the match for him before he himfelf had drawn a confidence from her actions fufficient to mention his paffion to her; for it was his opinion (and perhaps he was there in the right) that it is highly impolitick to talk ferioufly of love to a woman before you have made fuch a progrefs in her affections, that fhe herfelf expects and defires to hear it. But whatever diffidence the fears of a lover may create, which are apt to magnify every favour conferred on a rival, and to fee the little advances towards themfelves through the other end of the perfpective, it was impoffible that Horatio's paffion fhould fo blind his difcernment as to prevent his conceiving hopes from the behaviour of Leonora, whofe fondnefs for him was now as vifible to an indifferent perfon in their company as his for her. "I never knew any of thefe forward fluts come to good" (fays the lady who refufed Jofeph's entrance into the coach), "nor fhall I wonder at anything fhe doth in the fequel." The lady proceeded in her ftory thus: It was in the midft of a gay converfation in the walks one evening, when Horatio whifpered Leonora, that he was defirous to take a turn or two with her in private, for that he had fomething to communicate to her of great confequence. "Are you fure it is of confequence?" faid fhe, fmiling. "I hope," anfwered he, "you will think fo too, fince the whole future happinefs of my life muft depend on the event." Leonora, who very much fufpected what was coming, would have deferred it till another time; but Horatio, who had more than half conquered the difficulty of fpeaking by the firft motion, was fo very importunate, that fhe at laft yielded, and, leaving the reft of the company, they turned afide into an unfrequented walk. They had retired far out of the fight of the company, both maintaining a ftrict filence. At laft Horatio made a full ftop, and taking Leonora, who ftood pale and trembling, gently by the hand, he fetched a deep figh, and then, looking on her eyes with all the tendernefs imaginable, he cried out in a faltering accent, "O Leonora! is it neceffary for me to declare to you on what the future happinefs of my life muft be founded? Muft I fay there is fomething belonging to you which is a bar to my happinefs, and which unlefs you will part with, I muft be miferable!"--"What can that be?" replied Leonora. "No wonder," faid he, "you are furprized that I fhould make an objection to anything which is yours: yet fure you may guefs, fince it is the only one which the riches of the world, if they were mine, fhould purchafe for me. Oh, it is that which you muft part with to beftow all the reft! Can Leonora, or rather will fhe, doubt longer? Let me then whifper it in her ears--It is your name, madam. It is by parting with that, by your condefcenfion to be for ever mine, which muft at once prevent me from being the moft miferable, and will render me the happieft of mankind." Leonora, covered with blufhes, and with as angry a look as fhe could poffibly put on, told him, "That had fhe fufpected what his declaration would have been, he fhould not have decoyed her from her company, that he had fo furprized and frighted her, that fhe begged him to convey her back as quick as poffible;" which he, trembling very near as much as herfelf, did. "More fool he," cried Slipflop; "it is a fign he knew very little of our fect."--"Truly, madam," faid Adams, "I think you are in the right: I fhould have infifted to know a piece of her mind, when I had carried matters fo far." But Mrs Grave-airs defired the lady to omit all fuch fulfome ftuff in her ftory, for that it made her fick. Well then, madam, to be as concife as poffible, faid the lady, many weeks had not paffed after this interview before Horatio and Leonora were what they call on a good footing together. All ceremonies except the laft were now over; the writings were now drawn, and everything was in the utmoft forwardnefs preparative to the putting Horatio in poffeffion of all his wifhes. I will, if you pleafe, repeat you a letter from each of them, which I have got by heart, and which will give you no fmall idea of their paffion on both fides. Mrs Grave-airs objected to hearing thefe letters; but being put to the vote, it was carried againft her by all the reft in the coach; parfon Adams contending for it with the utmoft vehemence. HORATIO TO LEONORA. "How vain, moft adorable creature, is the purfuit of pleafure in the abfence of an object to which the mind is entirely devoted, unlefs it have fome relation to that object! I was laft night condemned to the fociety of men of wit and learning, which, however agreeable it might have formerly been to me, now only gave me a fufpicion that they imputed my abfence in converfation to the true caufe. For which reafon, when your engagements forbid me the ecftatic happinefs of feeing you, I am always defirous to be alone; fince my fentiments for Leonora are fo delicate, that I cannot bear the apprehenfion of another's prying into thofe delightful endearments with which the warm imagination of a lover will fometimes indulge him, and which I fufpect my eyes then betray. To fear this difcovery of our thoughts may perhaps appear too ridiculous a nicety to minds not fufceptible of all the tenderneffes of this delicate paffion. And furely we fhall fufpect there are few fuch, when we confider that it requires every human virtue to exert itfelf in its full extent; fince the beloved, whofe happinefs it ultimately refpects, may give us charming opportunities of being brave in her defence, generous to her wants, compaffionate to her afflictions, grateful to her kindnefs; and in the fame manner, of exercifing every other virtue, which he who would not do to any degree, and that with the utmoft rapture, can never deferve the name of a lover. It is, therefore, with a view to the delicate modefty of your mind that I cultivate it fo purely in my own; and it is that which will fufficiently fuggeft to you the uneafinefs I bear from thofe liberties, which men to whom the world allow politenefs will fometimes give themfelves on thefe occafions. "Can I tell you with what eagernefs I expect the arrival of that bleft day, when I fhall experience the falfehood of a common affertion, that the greateft human happinefs confifts in hope? A doctrine which no perfon had ever ftronger reafon to believe than myfelf at prefent, fince none ever tafted fuch blifs as fires my bofom with the thoughts of fpending my future days with fuch a companion, and that every action of my life will have the glorious fatiffaction of conducing to your happinefs." LEONORA TO HORATIO.[A] [A] This letter was written by a young lady on reading the former. "The refinement of your mind has been fo evidently proved by every word and action ever fince I had the firft pleafure of knowing you, that I thought it impoffible my good opinion of Horatio could have been heightened to any additional proof of merit. This very thought was my amufement when I received your laft letter, which, when I opened, I confefs I was furprized to find the delicate fentiments expreffed there fo far exceeding what I thought could come even from you (although I know all the generous principles human nature is capable of are centred in your breaft), that words cannot paint what I feel on the reflection that my happinefs fhall be the ultimate end of all your actions. "Oh, Horatio! what a life muft that be, where the meaneft domeftic cares are fweetened by the pleafing confideration that the man on earth who beft deferves, and to whom you are moft inclined to give your affections, is to reap either profit or pleafure from all you do! In fuch a cafe toils muft be turned into diverfions, and nothing but the unavoidable inconveniences of life can make us remember that we are mortal. "If the folitary turn of your thoughts, and the defire of keeping them undifcovered, makes even the converfation of men of wit and learning tedious to you, what anxious hours muft I fpend, who am condemned by cuftom to the converfation of women, whofe natural curiofity leads them to pry into all my thoughts, and whofe envy can never fuffer Horatio's heart to be poffeffed by any one, without forcing them into malicious defigns againft the perfon who is fo happy as to poffefs it! But, indeed, if ever envy can poffibly have any excufe, or even alleviation, it is in this cafe, where the good is fo great, and it muft be equally natural to all to wifh it for themfelves; nor am I afhamed to own it: and to your merit, Horatio, I am obliged, that prevents my being in that moft uneafy of all the fituations I can figure in my imagination, of being led by inclination to love the perfon whom my own judgment forces me to condemn." Matters were in fo great forwardnefs between this fond couple, that the day was fixed for their marriage, and was now within a fortnight, when the feffions chanced to be held for that county in a town about twenty miles' diftance from that which is the fcene of our ftory. It feems, it is ufual for the young gentlemen of the bar to repair to thefe feffions, not fo much for the fake of profit as to fhow their parts and learn the law of the juftices of peace; for which purpofe one of the wifeft and graveft of all the juftices is appointed fpeaker, or chairman, as they modeftly call it, and he reads them a lecture, and inftructs them in the true knowledge of the law. "You are here guilty of a little miftake," fays Adams, "which, if you pleafe, I will correct: I have attended at one of thefe quarter-feffions, where I obferved the counfel taught the juftices, inftead of learning anything of them." It is not very material, faid the lady. Hither repaired Horatio, who, as he hoped by his profeffion to advance his fortune, which was not at prefent very large, for the fake of his dear Leonora, he refolved to fpare no pains, nor lofe any opportunity of improving or advancing himfelf in it. The fame afternoon in which he left the town, as Leonora ftood at her window, a coach and fix paffed by, which fhe declared to be the completeft, genteeleft, prettieft equipage fhe ever faw; adding thefe remarkable words, "Oh, I am in love with that equipage!" which, though her friend Florella at that time did not greatly regard, fhe hath fince remembered. In the evening an affembly was held, which Leonora honoured with her company; but intended to pay her dear Horatio the compliment of refufing to dance in his abfence. Oh, why have not women as good refolution to maintain their vows as they have often good inclinations in making them! The gentleman who owned the coach and fix came to the affembly. His clothes were as remarkably fine as his equipage could be. He foon attracted the eyes of the company; all the fmarts, all the filk waiftcoats with filver and gold edgings, were eclipfed in an inftant. "Madam," faid Adams, "if it be not impertinent, I fhould be glad to know how this gentleman was dreft." Sir, anfwered the lady, I have been told he had on a cut velvet coat of a cinnamon colour, lined with a pink fatten, embroidered all over with gold; his waiftcoat, which was cloth of filver, was embroidered with gold likewife. I cannot be particular as to the reft of his drefs; but it was all in the French fafhion, for Bellarmine (that was his name) was juft arrived from Paris. This fine figure did not more entirely engage the eyes of every lady in the affembly than Leonora did his. He had fcarce beheld her, but he ftood motionlefs and fixed as a ftatue, or at leaft would have done fo if good breeding had permitted him. However, he carried it fo far before he had power to correct himfelf, that every perfon in the room eafily difcovered where his admiration was fettled. The other ladies began to fingle out their former partners, all perceiving who would be Bellarmine's choice; which they however endeavoured, by all poffible means, to prevent: many of them faying to Leonora, "O madam! I fuppofe we fhan't have the pleafure of feeing you dance to-night;" and then crying out, in Bellarmine's hearing, "Oh! Leonora will not dance, I affure you: her partner is not here." One malicioufly attempted to prevent her, by fending a difagreeable fellow to afk her, that fo fhe might be obliged either to dance with him, or fit down; but this fcheme proved abortive. Leonora faw herfelf admired by the fine ftranger, and envied by every woman prefent. Her little heart began to flutter within her, and her head was agitated with a convulfive motion: fhe feemed as if fhe would fpeak to feveral of her acquaintance, but had nothing to fay; for, as fhe would not mention her prefent triumph, fo fhe could not difengage her thoughts one moment from the contemplation of it. She had never tafted anything like this happinefs. She had before known what it was to torment a fingle woman; but to be hated and fecretly curfed by a whole affembly was a joy referved for this bleffed moment. As this vaft profufion of ecftafy had confounded her underftanding, fo there was nothing fo foolifh as her behaviour: fhe played a thoufand childifh tricks, diftorted her perfon into feveral fhapes, and her face into feveral laughs, without any reafon. In a word, her carriage was as abfurd as her defires, which were to affect an infenfibility of the ftranger's admiration, and at the fame time a triumph, from that admiration, over every woman in the room. In this temper of mind, Bellarmine, having inquired who fhe was, advanced to her, and with a low bow begged the honour of dancing with her, which fhe, with as low a curtefy, immediately granted. She danced with him all night, and enjoyed, perhaps, the higheft pleafure that fhe was capable of feeling. At thefe words, Adams fetched a deep groan, which frighted the ladies, who told him, "They hoped he was not ill." He anfwered, "He groaned only for the folly of Leonora." Leonora retired (continued the lady) about fix in the morning, but not to reft. She tumbled and toffed in her bed, with very fhort intervals of fleep, and thofe entirely filled with dreams of the equipage and fine clothes fhe had feen, and the balls, operas, and ridottos, which had been the fubject of their converfation. In the afternoon, Bellarmine, in the dear coach and fix, came to wait on her. He was indeed charmed with her perfon, and was, on inquiry, fo well pleafed with the circumftances of her father (for he himfelf, notwithftanding all his finery, was not quite fo rich as a Croefus or an Attalus).--"Attalus," fays Mr. Adams: "but pray how came you acquainted with thefe names?" The lady fmiled at the queftion, and proceeded. He was fo pleafed, I fay, that he refolved to make his addreffes to her directly. He did fo accordingly, and that with fo much warmth and brifknefs, that he quickly baffled her weak repulfes, and obliged the lady to refer him to her father, who, fhe knew, would quickly declare in favour of a coach and fix. Thus what Horatio had by fighs and tears, love and tendernefs, been fo long obtaining, the French-Englifh Bellarmine with gaiety and gallantry poffeffed himfelf of in an inftant. In other words, what modefty had employed a full year in raifing, impudence demolifhed in twenty-four hours. Here Adams groaned a fecond time; but the ladies, who began to fmoke him, took no notice. From the opening of the affembly till the end of Bellarmine's vifit, Leonora had fcarce once thought of Horatio; but he now began, though an unwelcome gueft, to enter into her mind. She wifhed fhe had feen the charming Bellarmine and his charming equipage before matters had gone fo far. "Yet why," fays fhe, "fhould I wifh to have feen him before; or what fignifies it that I have feen him now? Is not Horatio my lover, almoft my hufband? Is he not as handfome, nay handfomer than Bellarmine? Aye, but Bellarmine is the genteeler, and the finer man; yes, that he muft be allowed. Yes, yes, he is that certainly. But did not I, no longer ago than yefterday, love Horatio more than all the world? Aye, but yefterday I had not feen Bellarmine. But doth not Horatio doat on me, and may he not in defpair break his heart if I abandon him? Well, and hath not Bellarmine a heart to break too? Yes, but I promifed Horatio firft; but that was poor Bellarmine's miffortune; if I had feen him firft, I fhould certainly have preferred him. Did not the dear creature prefer me to every woman in the affembly, when every fhe was laying out for him? When was it in Horatio's power to give me fuch an inftance of affection? Can he give me an equipage, or any of thofe things which Bellarmine will make me miftrefs of? How vaft is the difference between being the wife of a poor counfellor and the wife of one of Bellarmine's fortune! If I marry Horatio, I fhall triumph over no more than one rival; but by marrying Bellarmine, I fhall be the envy of all my acquaintance. What happinefs! But can I fuffer Horatio to die? for he hath fworn he cannot furvive my lofs: but perhaps he may not die: if he fhould, can I prevent it? Muft I facrifice myfelf to him? befides, Bellarmine may be as miferable for me too." She was thus arguing with herfelf, when fome young ladies called her to the walks, and a little relieved her anxiety for the prefent. The next morning Bellarmine breakfafted with her in prefence of her aunt, whom he fufficiently informed of his paffion for Leonora. He was no fooner withdrawn than the old lady began to advife her niece on this occafion. "You fee, child," fays fhe, "what fortune hath thrown in your way; and I hope you will not withftand your own preferment." Leonora, fighing, begged her not to mention any fuch thing, when fhe knew her engagements to Horatio. "Engagements to a fig!" cried the aunt; "you fhould thank Heaven on your knees that you have it yet in your power to break them. Will any woman hefitate a moment whether fhe fhall ride in a coach or walk on foot all the days of her life? But Bellarmine drives fix, and Horatio not even a pair."--"Yes, but, madam, what will the world fay?" anfwered Leonora: "will not they condemn me?"--"The world is always on the fide of prudence," cries the aunt, "and would furely condemn you if you facrificed your intereft to any motive whatever. Oh! I know the world very well; and you fhew your ignorance, my dear, by your objection. O' my confcience! the world is wifer. I have lived longer in it than you; and I affure you there is not anything worth our regard befides money; nor did I ever know one perfon who married from other confiderations, who did not afterwards heartily repent it. Befides, if we examine the two men, can you prefer a fneaking fellow, who hath been bred at the univerfity, to a fine gentleman juft come from his travels. All the world muft allow Bellarmine to be a fine gentleman, pofitively a fine gentleman, and a handfome man."--"Perhaps, madam, I fhould not doubt, if I knew how to be handfomely off with the other."--"Oh! leave that to me," fays the aunt. "You know your father hath not been acquainted with the affair. Indeed, for my part I thought it might do well enough, not dreaming of fuch an offer; but I'll difengage you: leave me to give the fellow an anfwer. I warrant you fhall have no farther trouble." Leonora was at length fatiffied with her aunt's reafoning; and Bellarmine fupping with her that evening, it was agreed he fhould the next morning go to her father and propofe the match, which fhe confented fhould be confummated at his return. The aunt retired foon after fupper; and, the lovers being left together, Bellarmine began in the following manner: "Yes, madam; this coat, I affure you, was made at Paris, and I defy the beft Englifh taylor even to imitate it. There is not one of them can cut, madam; they can't cut. If you obferve how this fkirt is turned, and this fleeve: a clumfy Englifh rafcal can do nothing like it. Pray, how do you like my liveries?" Leonora anfwered, "She thought them very pretty."--"All French," fays he, "I affure you, except the greatcoats; I never truft anything more than a greatcoat to an Englifhman. You know one muft encourage our own people what one can, efpecially as, before I had a place, I was in the country intereft, he, he, he! But for myfelf, I would fee the dirty ifland at the bottom of the fea, rather than wear a fingle rag of Englifh work about me: and I am fure, after you have made one tour to Paris, you will be of the fame opinion with regard to your own clothes. You can't conceive what an addition a French drefs would be to your beauty; I pofitively affure you, at the firft opera I faw fince I came over, I miftook the Englifh ladies for chambermaids, he, he, he!" With fuch fort of polite difcourfe did the gay Bellarmine entertain his beloved Leonora, when the door opened on a fudden, and Horatio entered the room. Here 'tis impoffible to exprefs the furprize of Leonora. "Poor woman!" fays Mrs Slipflop, "what a terrible quandary fhe muft be in!"--"Not at all," fays Mrs Grave-airs; "fuch fluts can never be confounded."--"She muft have then more than Corinthian affurance," faid Adams; "aye, more than Lais herfelf." A long filence, continued the lady, prevailed in the whole company. If the familiar entrance of Horatio ftruck the greateft aftonifhment into Bellarmine, the unexpected prefence of Bellarmine no lefs furprized Horatio. At length Leonora, collecting all the fpirit fhe was miftrefs of, addreffed herfelf to the latter, and pretended to wonder at the reafon of fo late a vifit. "I fhould indeed," anfwered he, "have made fome apology for difturbing you at this hour, had not my finding you in company affured me I do not break in upon your repofe." Bellarmine rofe from his chair, traverfed the room in a minuet ftep, and hummed an opera tune, while Horatio, advancing to Leonora, afked her in a whifper if that gentleman was not a relation of hers; to which fhe anfwered with a fmile, or rather fneer, "No, he is no relation of mine yet;" adding, "fhe could not guefs the meaning of his queftion." Horatio told her foftly, "It did not arife from jealoufy."--"Jealoufy! I affure you, it would be very ftrange in a common acquaintance to give himfelf any of thofe airs." Thefe words a little furprized Horatio; but, before he had time to anfwer, Bellarmine danced up to the lady and told her, "He feared he interrupted fome bufinefs between her and the gentleman."--"I can have no bufinefs," faid fhe, "with the gentleman, nor any other, which need be any fecret to you." "You'll pardon me," faid Horatio, "if I defire to know who this gentleman is who is to be entrufted with all our fecrets."--"You'll know foon enough," cries Leonora; "but I can't guefs what fecrets can ever pafs between us of fuch mighty confequence."--"No, madam!" cries Horatio; "I am fure you would not have me underftand you in earneft."--"'Tis indifferent to me," fays fhe, "how you underftand me; but I think fo unfeafonable a vifit is difficult to be underftood at all, at leaft when people find one engaged: though one's fervants do not deny one, one may expect a well-bred perfon fhould foon take the hint." "Madam," faid Horatio, "I did not imagine any engagement with a ftranger, as it feems this gentleman is, would have made my vifit impertinent, or that any fuch ceremonies were to be preferved between perfons in our fituation." "Sure you are in a dream," fays fhe, "or would perfuade me that I am in one. I know no pretenfions a common acquaintance can have to lay afide the ceremonies of good breeding." "Sure," faid he, "I am in a dream; for it is impoffible I fhould be really efteemed a common acquaintance by Leonora, after what has paffed between us?" "Paffed between us! Do you intend to affront me before this gentleman?" "D--n me, affront the lady," fays Bellarmine, cocking his hat, and ftrutting up to Horatio: "does any man dare affront this lady before me, d--n me?" "Hark'ee, fir," fays Horatio, "I would advife you to lay afide that fierce air; for I am mightily deceived if this lady has not a violent defire to get your worfhip a good drubbing." "Sir," faid Bellarmine, "I have the honour to be her protector; and, d--n me, if I underftand your meaning." "Sir," anfwered Horatio, "fhe is rather your protectrefs; but give yourfelf no more airs, for you fee I am prepared for you" (fhaking his whip at him). "Oh! _ferviteur tres humble_," fays Bellarmine: "_Je vous entend parfaitment bien_." At which time the aunt, who had heard of Horatio's vifit, entered the room, and foon fatiffied all his doubts. She convinced him that he was never more awake in his life, and that nothing more extraordinary had happened in his three days' abfence than a fmall alteration in the affections of Leonora; who now burft into tears, and wondered what reafon fhe had given him to ufe her in fo barbarous a manner. Horatio defired Bellarmine to withdraw with him; but the ladies prevented it by laying violent hands on the latter; upon which the former took his leave without any great ceremony, and departed, leaving the lady with his rival to confult for his fafety, which Leonora feared her indifcretion might have endangered; but the aunt comforted her with affurances that Horatio would not venture his perfon againft fo accomplifhed a cavalier as Bellarmine, and that, being a lawyer, he would feek revenge in his own way, and the moft they had to apprehend from him was an action. They at length therefore agreed to permit Bellarmine to retire to his lodgings, having firft fettled all matters relating to the journey which he was to undertake in the morning, and their preparations for the nuptials at his return. But, alas! as wife men have obferved, the feat of valour is not the countenance; and many a grave and plain man will, on a juft provocation, betake himfelf to that mifchievous metal, cold iron; while men of a fiercer brow, and fometimes with that emblem of courage, a cockade, will more prudently decline it. Leonora was waked in the morning, from a vifionary coach and fix, with the difmal account that Bellarmine was run through the body by Horatio; that he lay languifhing at an inn, and the furgeons had declared the wound mortal. She immediately leaped out of the bed, danced about the room in a frantic manner, tore her hair and beat her breaft in all the agonies of defpair; in which fad condition her aunt, who likewife arofe at the news, found her. The good old lady applied her utmoft art to comfort her niece. She told her, "While there was life there was hope; but that if he fhould die her affliction would be of no fervice to Bellarmine, and would only expofe herfelf, which might, probably, keep her fome time without any future offer; that, as matters had happened, her wifeft way would be to think no more of Bellarmine, but to endeavour to regain the affections of Horatio." "Speak not to me," cried the difconfolate Leonora; "is it not owing to me that poor Bellarmine has loft his life? Have not thefe curfed charms (at which words fhe looked fteadfaftly in the glafs) been the ruin of the moft charming man of this age? Can I ever bear to contemplate my own face again (with her eyes ftill fixed on the glafs)? Am I not the murderefs of the fineft gentleman? No other woman in the town could have made any impreffion on him." "Never think of things paft," cries the aunt: "think of regaining the affections of Horatio." "What reafon," faid the niece, "have I to hope he would forgive me? No, I have loft him as well as the other, and it was your wicked advice which was the occafion of all; you feduced me, contrary to my inclinations, to abandon poor Horatio (at which words fhe burft into tears); you prevailed upon me, whether I would or no, to give up my affections for him; had it not been for you, Bellarmine never would have entered into my thoughts; had not his addreffes been backed by your perfuafions, they never would have made any impreffion on me; I fhould have defied all the fortune and equipage in the world; but it was you, it was you, who got the better of my youth and fimplicity, and forced me to lofe my dear Horatio for ever." The aunt was almoft borne down with this torrent of words; fhe, however, rallied all the ftrength fhe could, and, drawing her mouth up in a purfe, began: "I am not furprized, niece, at this ingratitude. Thofe who advife young women for their intereft, muft always expect fuch a return: I am convinced my brother will thank me for breaking off your match with Horatio, at any rate."--"That may not be in your power yet," anfwered Leonora, "though it is very ungrateful in you to defire or attempt it, after the prefents you have received from him." (For indeed true it is, that many prefents, and fome pretty valuable ones, had paffed from Horatio to the old lady; but as true it is, that Bellarmine, when he breakfafted with her and her niece, had complimented her with a brilliant from his finger, of much greater value than all fhe had touched of the other.) The aunt's gall was on float to reply, when a fervant brought a letter into the room, which Leonora, hearing it came from Bellarmine, with great eagernefs opened, and read as follows:-- "MOST DIVINE CREATURE,--The wound which I fear you have heard I received from my rival is not like to be fo fatal as thofe fhot into my heart which have been fired from your eyes, _tout brilliant_. Thofe are the only cannons by which I am to fall; for my furgeon gives me hopes of being foon able to attend your _ruelle_; till when, unlefs you would do me an honour which I have fcarce the _hardieffe_ to think of, your abfence will be the greateft anguifh which can be felt by, "Madam, "_Avec toute le refpecte_ in the world, "Your moft obedient, moft abfolute _Devote_, "BELLARMINE." As foon as Leonora perceived fuch hopes of Bellarmine's recovery, and that the goffip Fame had, according to cuftom, fo enlarged his danger, fhe prefently abandoned all further thoughts of Horatio, and was foon reconciled to her aunt, who received her again into favour, with a more Chriftian forgivenefs than we generally meet with. Indeed, it is poffible fhe might be a little alarmed at the hints which her niece had given her concerning the prefents. She might apprehend fuch rumours, fhould they get abroad, might injure a reputation which, by frequenting church twice a day, and preferving the utmoft rigour and ftrictnefs in her countenance and behaviour for many years, fhe had eftablifhed. Leonora's paffion returned now for Bellarmine with greater force, after its fmall relaxation, than ever. She propofed to her aunt to make him a vifit in his confinement, which the old lady, with great and commendable prudence, advifed her to decline: "For," fays fhe, "fhould any accident intervene to prevent your intended match, too forward a behaviour with this lover may injure you in the eyes of others. Every woman, till fhe is married, ought to confider of, and provide againft, the poffibility of the affair's breaking off." Leonora faid, "She fhould be indifferent to whatever might happen in fuch a cafe; for fhe had now fo abfolutely placed her affections on this dear man (fo fhe called him), that, if it was her miffortune to lofe him, fhe fhould for ever abandon all thoughts of mankind." She, therefore, refolved to vifit him, notwithftanding all the prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, and that very afternoon executed her refolution. The lady was proceeding in her ftory, when the coach drove into the inn where the company were to dine, forely to the diffatiffaction of Mr Adams, whofe ears were the moft hungry part about him; he being, as the reader may perhaps guefs, of an infatiable curiofity, and heartily defirous of hearing the end of this amour, though he profeffed he could fcarce wifh fuccefs to a lady of fo inconftant a difpofition. CHAPTER V. _A dreadful quarrel which happened at the Inn where the company dined, with its bloody confequences to Mr Adams._ As foon as the paffengers had alighted from the coach, Mr Adams, as was his cuftom, made directly to the kitchen, where he found Jofeph fitting by the fire, and the hoftefs anointing his leg; for the horfe which Mr Adams had borrowed of his clerk had fo violent a propenfity to kneeling, that one would have thought it had been his trade, as well as his mafter's; nor would he always give any notice of fuch his intention; he was often found on his knees when the rider leaft expected it. This foible, however, was of no great inconvenience to the parfon, who was accuftomed to it; and, as his legs almoft touched the ground when he beftrode the beaft, had but a little way to fall, and threw himfelf forward on fuch occafions with fo much dexterity that he never received any mifchief; the horfe and he frequently rolling many paces' diftance, and afterwards both getting up and meeting as good friends as ever. Poor Jofeph, who had not been ufed to fuch kind of cattle, though an excellent horfeman, did not fo happily difengage himfelf; but, falling with his leg under the beaft, received a violent contufion, to which the good woman was, as we have faid, applying a warm hand, with fome camphorated fpirits, juft at the time when the parfon entered the kitchen. He had fcarce expreffed his concern for Jofeph's miffortune before the hoft likewife entered. He was by no means of Mr Tow-woufe's gentle difpofition; and was, indeed, perfect mafter of his houfe, and everything in it but his guefts. This furly fellow, who always proportioned his refpect to the appearance of a traveller, from "God blefs your honour," down to plain "Coming prefently," obferving his wife on her knees to a footman, cried out, without confidering his circumftances, "What a pox is the woman about? why don't you mind the company in the coach? Go and afk them what they will have for dinner." "My dear," fays fhe, "you know they can have nothing but what is at the fire, which will be ready prefently; and really the poor young man's leg is very much bruifed." At which words fhe fell to chafing more violently than before: the bell then happening to ring, he damn'd his wife, and bid her go in to the company, and not ftand rubbing there all day, for he did not believe the young fellow's leg was fo bad as he pretended; and if it was, within twenty miles he would find a furgeon to cut it off. Upon thefe words, Adams fetched two ftrides acrofs the room; and fnapping his fingers over his head, muttered aloud, He would excommunicate fuch a wretch for a farthing, for he believed the devil had more humanity. Thefe words occafioned a dialogue between Adams and the hoft, in which there were two or three fharp replies, till Jofeph bad the latter know how to behave himfelf to his betters. At which the hoft (having firft ftrictly furveyed Adams) fcornfully repeating the word "betters," flew into a rage, and, telling Jofeph he was as able to walk out of his houfe as he had been to walk into it, offered to lay violent hands on him; which perceiving, Adams dealt him fo found a compliment over his face with his fift, that the blood immediately gufhed out of his nofe in a ftream. The hoft, being unwilling to be outdone in courtefy, efpecially by a perfon of Adams's figure, returned the favour with fo much gratitude, that the parfon's noftrils began to look a little redder than ufual. Upon which he again affailed his antagonift, and with another ftroke laid him fprawling on the floor. The hoftefs, who was a better wife than fo furly a hufband deferved, feeing her hufband all bloody and ftretched along, haftened prefently to his affiftance, or rather to revenge the blow, which, to all appearance, was the laft he would ever receive; when, lo! a pan full of hog's blood, which unluckily ftood on the dreffer, prefented itfelf firft to her hands. She feized it in her fury, and without any reflection, difcharged it into the parfon's face; and with fo good an aim, that much the greater part firft faluted his countenance, and trickled thence in fo large a current down to his beard, and over his garments, that a more horrible fpectacle was hardly to be feen, or even imagined. All which was perceived by Mrs Slipflop, who entered the kitchen at that inftant. This good gentlewoman, not being of a temper fo extremely cool and patient as perhaps was required to afk many queftions on this occafion, flew with great impetuofity at the hoftefs's cap, which, together with fome of her hair, fhe plucked from her head in a moment, giving her, at the fame time, feveral hearty cuffs in the face; which by frequent practice on the inferior fervants, fhe had learned an excellent knack of delivering with a good grace. Poor Jofeph could hardly rife from his chair; the parfon was employed in wiping the blood from his eyes, which had entirely blinded him; and the landlord was but juft beginning to ftir; whilft Mrs Slipflop, holding down the landlady's face with her left hand, made fo dexterous an ufe of her right, that the poor woman began to roar, in a key which alarmed all the company in the inn. There happened to be in the inn, at this time, befides the ladies who arrived in the ftage-coach, the two gentlemen who were prefent at Mr Tow-woufe's when Jofeph was detained for his horfe's meat, and whom we have before mentioned to have ftopt at the alehoufe with Adams. There was likewife a gentleman juft returned from his travels to Italy; all whom the horrid outcry of murder prefently brought into the kitchen, where the feveral combatants were found in the poftures already defcribed. It was now no difficulty to put an end to the fray, the conquerors being fatiffied with the vengeance they had taken, and the conquered having no appetite to renew the fight. The principal figure, and which engaged the eyes of all, was Adams, who was all over covered with blood, which the whole company concluded to be his own, and confequently imagined him no longer for this world. But the hoft, who had now recovered from his blow, and was rifen from the ground, foon delivered them from this apprehenfion, by damning his wife for wafting the hog's puddings, and telling her all would have been very well if fhe had not intermeddled, like a b--as fhe was; adding, he was very glad the gentlewoman had paid her, though not half what fhe deferved. The poor woman had indeed fared much the worft; having, befides the unmerciful cuffs received, loft a quantity of hair, which Mrs Slipflop in triumph held in her left hand. The traveller, addreffing himfelf to Mrs Grave-airs, defired her not to be frightened; for here had been only a little boxing, which he faid, to their _difgracia_, the Englifh were _accuftomata_ to: adding, it muft be, however, a fight fomewhat ftrange to him, who was juft come from Italy; the Italians not being addicted to the _cuffardo_ but _baftonza_, fays he. He then went up to Adams, and telling him he looked like the ghoft of Othello, bid him not fhake his gory locks at him, for he could not fay he did it. Adams very innocently anfwered, "Sir, I am far from accufing you." He then returned to the lady, and cried, "I find the bloody gentleman is _uno infipido del nullo fenfo_. _Dammato di me_, if I have feen fuch a _fpectaculo_ in my way from Viterbo." One of the gentlemen having learnt from the hoft the occafion of this buftle, and being affured by him that Adams had ftruck the firft blow, whifpered in his ear, "He'd warrant he would recover."--"Recover! mafter," faid the hoft, fmiling: "yes, yes, I am not afraid of dying with a blow or two neither; I am not fuch a chicken as that."--"Pugh!" faid the gentleman, "I mean you will recover damages in that action which, undoubtedly, you intend to bring, as foon as a writ can be returned from London; for you look like a man of too much fpirit and courage to fuffer any one to beat you without bringing your action againft him: he muft be a fcandalous fellow indeed who would put up with a drubbing whilft the law is open to revenge it; befides, he hath drawn blood from you, and fpoiled your coat; and the jury will give damages for that too. An excellent new coat upon my word; and now not worth a fhilling! I don't care," continued he, "to intermeddle in thefe cafes; but you have a right to my evidence; and if I am fworn, I muft fpeak the truth. I faw you fprawling on the floor, and blood gufhing from your noftrils. You may take your own opinion; but was I in your circumftances, every drop of my blood fhould convey an ounce of gold into my pocket: remember I don't advife you to go to law; but if your jury were Chriftians, they muft give fwinging damages. That's all."--"Mafter," cried the hoft, fcratching his head, "I have no ftomach to law, I thank you. I have feen enough of that in the parifh, where two of my neighbours have been at law about a houfe, till they have both lawed themfelves into a gaol." At which words he turned about, and began to inquire again after his hog's puddings; nor would it probably have been a fufficient excufe for his wife, that fhe fpilt them in his defence, had not fome awe of the company, efpecially of the Italian traveller, who was a perfon of great dignity, withheld his rage. Whilft one of the above-mentioned gentlemen was employed, as we have feen him, on the behalf of the landlord, the other was no lefs hearty on the fide of Mr Adams, whom he advifed to bring his action immediately. He faid the affault of the wife was in law the affault of the hufband, for they were but one perfon; and he was liable to pay damages, which he faid muft be confiderable, where fo bloody a difpofition appeared. Adams anfwered, If it was true that they were but one perfon, he had affaulted the wife; for he was forry to own he had ftruck the hufband the firft blow. "I am forry you own it too," cries the gentleman; "for it could not poffibly appear to the court; for here was no evidence prefent but the lame man in the chair, whom I fuppofe to be your friend, and would confequently fay nothing but what made for you."--"How, fir," fays Adams, "do you take me for a villain, who would profecute revenge in cold blood, and ufe unjuftifiable means to obtain it? If you knew me, and my order, I fhould think you affronted both." At the word order, the gentleman ftared (for he was too bloody to be of any modern order of knights); and, turning haftily about, faid, "Every man knew his own bufinefs." Matters being now compofed, the company retired to their feveral apartments; the two gentlemen congratulating each other on the fuccefs of their good offices in procuring a perfect reconciliation between the contending parties; and the traveller went to his repaft, crying, "As the Italian poet fays-- '_Je voi_ very well _que tutta e pace_, So fend up dinner, good Boniface.'" The coachman began now to grow importunate with his paffengers, whofe entrance into the coach was retarded by Mifs Grave-airs infifting, againft the remonftrance of all the reft, that fhe would not admit a footman into the coach; for poor Jofeph was too lame to mount a horfe. A young lady, who was, as it feems, an earl's grand-daughter, begged it with almoft tears in her eyes. Mr Adams prayed, and Mrs Slipflop fcolded; but all to no purpofe. She faid, "She would not demean herfelf to ride with a footman: that there were waggons on the road: that if the mafter of the coach defired it, fhe would pay for two places; but would fuffer no fuch fellow to come in."--"Madam," fays Slipflop, "I am fure no one can refufe another coming into a ftage-coach."--"I don't know, madam," fays the lady; "I am not much ufed to ftage-coaches; I feldom travel in them."--"That may be, madam," replied Slipflop; "very good people do; and fome people's betters, for aught I know." Mifs Grave-airs faid, "Some folks might fometimes give their tongues a liberty, to fome people that were their betters, which did not become them; for her part, fhe was not ufed to converfe with fervants." Slipflop returned, "Some people kept no fervants to converfe with; for her part, fhe thanked Heaven fhe lived in a family where there were a great many, and had more under her own command than any paultry little gentlewoman in the kingdom." Mifs Grave-airs cried, "She believed her miftrefs would not encourage fuch faucinefs to her betters."--"My betters," fays Slipflop, "who is my betters, pray?"--"I am your betters," anfwered Mifs Grave-airs, "and I'll acquaint your miftrefs."--At which Mrs Slipflop laughed aloud, and told her, "Her lady was one of the great gentry; and fuch little paultry gentlewomen as fome folks, who travelled in ftagecoaches, would not eafily come at her." This fmart dialogue between fome people and fome folks was going on at the coach door when a folemn perfon, riding into the inn, and feeing Mifs Grave-airs, immediately accofted her with "Dear child, how do you?" She prefently anfwered, "O papa, I am glad you have overtaken me."--"So am I," anfwered he; "for one of our coaches is juft at hand; and, there being room for you in it, you fhall go no farther in the ftage unlefs you defire it."--"How can you imagine I fhould defire it?" fays fhe; fo, bidding Slipflop ride with her fellow, if fhe pleafed, fhe took her father by the hand, who was juft alighted, and walked with him into a room. Adams inftantly afked the coachman, in a whifper, "If he knew who the gentleman was?" The coachman anfwered, "He was now a gentleman, and kept his horfe and man; but times are altered, mafter," faid be; "I remember when he was no better born than myfelf."--"Ay! ay!" fays Adams. "My father drove the fquire's coach," anfwered he, "when that very man rode poftillion; but he is now his fteward; and a great gentleman." Adams then fnapped his fingers, and cried, "He thought fhe was fome fuch trollop." Adams made hafte to acquaint Mrs Slipflop with this good news, as he imagined it; but it found a reception different from what he expected. The prudent gentlewoman, who defpifed the anger of Mifs Grave-airs whilft fhe conceived her the daughter of a gentleman of fmall fortune, now fhe heard her alliance with the upper fervants of a great family in her neighbourhood, began to fear her intereft with the miftrefs. She wifhed fhe had not carried the difpute fo far, and began to think of endeavouring to reconcile herfelf to the young lady before fhe left the inn; when, luckily, the fcene at London, which the reader can fcarce have forgotten, prefented itfelf to her mind, and comforted her with fuch affurance, that fhe no longer apprehended any enemy with her miftrefs. Everything being now adjufted, the company entered the coach, which was juft on its departure, when one lady recollected fhe had left her fan, a fecond her gloves, a third a fnuff-box, and a fourth a fmelling-bottle behind her; to find all which occafioned fome delay and much fwearing to the coachman. As foon as the coach had left the inn, the women all together fell to the character of Mifs Grave-airs; whom one of them declared fhe had fufpected to be fome low creature, from the beginning of their journey, and another affirmed fhe had not even the looks of a gentlewoman: a third warranted fhe was no better than fhe fhould be; and, turning to the lady who had related the ftory in the coach, faid, "Did you ever hear, madam, anything fo prudifh as her remarks? Well, deliver me from the cenforioufnefs of fuch a prude." The fourth added, "O madam! all thefe creatures are cenforious; but for my part, I wonder where the wretch was bred; indeed, I muft own I have feldom converfed with thefe mean kind of people, fo that it may appear ftranger to me; but to refufe the general defire of a whole company had fomething in it fo aftonifhing, that, for my part, I own I fhould hardly believe it if my own ears had not been witneffes to it."--"Yes, and fo handfome a young fellow," cries Slipflop; "the woman muft have no compulfion in her: I believe fhe is more of a Turk than a Chriftian; I am certain, if fhe had any Chriftian woman's blood in her veins, the fight of fuch a young fellow muft have warmed it. Indeed, there are fome wretched, miferable old objects, that turn one's ftomach; I fhould not wonder if fhe had refufed fuch a one; I am as nice as herfelf, and fhould have cared no more than herfelf for the company of ftinking old fellows; but, hold up thy head, Jofeph, thou art none of thofe; and fhe who hath not compulfion for thee is a Myhummetman, and I will maintain it." This converfation made Jofeph uneafy as well as the ladies; who, perceiving the fpirits which Mrs Slipflop was in (for indeed fhe was not a cup too low), began to fear the confequence; one of them therefore defired the lady to conclude the ftory. "Aye, madam," faid Slipflop, "I beg your ladyfhip to give us that ftory you commenfated in the morning;" which requeft that well-bred woman immediately complied with. CHAPTER VI. _Conclufion of the unfortunate jilt._ Leonora, having once broke through the bounds which cuftom and modefty impofe on her fex, foon gave an unbridled indulgence to her paffion. Her vifits to Bellarmine were more conftant, as well as longer, than his furgeon's: in a word, fhe became abfolutely his nurfe; made his water-gruel, adminiftered him his medicines; and, notwithftanding the prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, almoft intirely refided in her wounded lover's apartment. The ladies of the town began to take her conduct under confideration: it was the chief topic of difcourfe at their tea-tables, and was very feverely cenfured by the moft part; efpecially by Lindamira, a lady whofe difcreet and ftarch carriage, together with a conftant attendance at church three times a day, had utterly defeated many malicious attacks on her own reputation; for fuch was the envy that Lindamira's virtue had attracted, that, notwithftanding her own ftrict behaviour and ftrict enquiry into the lives of others, fhe had not been able to efcape being the mark of fome arrows herfelf, which, however, did her no injury; a bleffing, perhaps, owed by her to the clergy, who were her chief male companions, and with two or three of whom fhe had been barbaroufly and unjuftly calumniated. "Not fo unjuftly neither, perhaps," fays Slipflop; "for the clergy are men, as well as other folks." The extreme delicacy of Lindamira's virtue was cruelly hurt by thofe freedoms which Leonora allowed herfelf: fhe faid, "It was an affront to her fex; that fhe did not imagine it confiftent with any woman's honour to fpeak to the creature, or to be feen in her company; and that, for her part, fhe fhould always refufe to dance at an affembly with her, for fear of contamination by taking her by the hand." But to return to my ftory: as foon as Bellarmine was recovered, which was fomewhat within a month from his receiving the wound, he fet out, according to agreement, for Leonora's father's, in order to propofe the match, and fettle all matters with him touching fettlements, and the like. A little before his arrival the old gentleman had received an intimation of the affair by the following letter, which I can repeat verbatim, and which, they fay, was written neither by Leonora nor her aunt, though it was in a woman's hand. The letter was in thefe words:-- "SIR,--I am forry to acquaint you that your daughter, Leonora, hath acted one of the bafeft as well as moft fimple parts with a young gentleman to whom fhe had engaged herfelf, and whom fhe hath (pardon the word) jilted for another of inferior fortune, notwithftanding his fuperior figure. You may take what meafures you pleafe on this occafion; I have performed what I thought my duty; as I have, though unknown to you, a very great refpect for your family." The old gentleman did not give himfelf the trouble to anfwer this kind epiftle; nor did he take any notice of it, after he had read it, till he faw Bellarmine. He was, to fay the truth, one of thofe fathers who look on children as an unhappy confequence of their youthful pleafures; which, as he would have been delighted not to have had attended them, fo was he no lefs pleafed with any opportunity to rid himfelf of the incumbrance. He paffed, in the world's language, as an exceeding good father; being not only fo rapacious as to rob and plunder all mankind to the utmoft of his power, but even to deny himfelf the conveniencies, and almoft neceffaries, of life; which his neighbours attributed to a defire of raifing immenfe fortunes for his children: but in fact it was not fo; he heaped up money for its own fake only, and looked on his children as his rivals, who were to enjoy his beloved miftrefs when he was incapable of poffeffing her, and which he would have been much more charmed with the power of carrying along with him; nor had his children any other fecurity of being his heirs than that the law would conftitute them fuch without a will, and that he had not affection enough for any one living to take the trouble of writing one. To this gentleman came Bellarmine, on the errand I have mentioned. His perfon, his equipage, his family, and his eftate, feemed to the father to make him an advantageous match for his daughter: he therefore very readily accepted his propofals: but when Bellarmine imagined the principal affair concluded, and began to open the incidental matters of fortune, the old gentleman prefently changed his countenance, faying, "He refolved never to marry his daughter on a Smithfield match; that whoever had love for her to take her would, when he died, find her fhare of his fortune in his coffers; but he had feen fuch examples of undutifulnefs happen from the too early generofity of parents, that he had made a vow never to part with a fhilling whilft he lived." He commended the faying of Solomon, "He that fpareth the rod fpoileth the child;" but added, "he might have likewife afferted, That he that fpareth the purfe faveth the child." He then ran into a difcourfe on the extravagance of the youth of the age; whence he launched into a differtation on horfes; and came at length to commend thofe Bellarmine drove. That fine gentleman, who at another feafon would have been well enough pleafed to dwell a little on that fubject, was now very eager to refume the circumftance of fortune. He faid, "He had a very high value for the young lady, and would receive her with lefs than he would any other whatever; but that even his love to her made fome regard to worldly matters neceffary; for it would be a moft diftracting fight for him to fee her, when he had the honour to be her hufband, in lefs than a coach and fix." The old gentleman anfwered, "Four will do, four will do;" and then took a turn from horfes to extravagance and from extravagance to horfes, till he came round to the equipage again; whither he was no fooner arrived than Bellarmine brought him back to the point; but all to no purpofe; he made his efcape from that fubject in a minute; till at laft the lover declared, "That in the prefent fituation of his affairs it was impoffible for him, though he loved Leonora more than _tout le monde_, to marry her without any fortune." To which the father anfwered, "He was forry that his daughter muft lofe fo valuable a match; that, if he had an inclination, at prefent it was not in his power to advance a fhilling: that he had had great loffes, and been at great expenfes on projects; which, though he had great expectation from them, had yet produced him nothing: that he did not know what might happen hereafter, as on the birth of a fon, or fuch accident; but he would make no promife, or enter into any article, for he would not break his vow for all the daughters in the world." In fhort, ladies, to keep you no longer in fufpenfe, Bellarmine, having tried every argument and perfuafion which he could invent, and finding them all ineffectual, at length took his leave, but not in order to return to Leonora; he proceeded directly to his own feat, whence, after a few days' ftay, he returned to Paris, to the great delight of the French and the honour of the Englifh nation. But as foon as he arrived at his home he prefently defpatched a meffenger with the following epiftle to Leonora:-- "ADORABLE AND CHARMANTE,--I am forry to have the honour to tell you I am not the _heureux_ perfon deftined for your divine arms. Your papa hath told me fo with a _politeffe_ not often feen on this fide Paris. You may perhaps guefs his manner of refufing me. _Ah, mon Dieu!_ You will certainly believe me, madam, incapable myfelf of delivering this _trifte_ meffage, which I intend to try the French air to cure the confequences of. _A jamais! Coeur! Ange! Au diable!_ If your papa obliges you to a marriage, I hope we fhall fee you at Paris; till when, the wind that flows from thence will be the warmeft _dans le monde_, for it will confift almoft entirely of my fighs. _Adieu, ma princeffe! Ah, l'amour!_ "BELLARMINE." I fhall not attempt, ladies, to defcribe Leonora's condition when fhe received this letter. It is a picture of horror, which I fhould have as little pleafure in drawing as you in beholding. She immediately left the place where fhe was the fubject of converfation and ridicule, and retired to that houfe I fhowed you when I began the ftory; where fhe hath ever fince led a difconfolate life, and deferves, perhaps, pity for her miffortunes, more than our cenfure for a behaviour to which the artifices of her aunt very probably contributed, and to which very young women are often rendered too liable by that blameable levity in the education of our fex. "If I was inclined to pity her," faid a young lady in the coach, "it would be for the lofs of Horatio; for I cannot difcern any miffortune in her miffing fuch a hufband as Bellarmine." "Why, I muft own," fays Slipflop, "the gentleman was a little falfe-hearted; but howfumever, it was hard to have two lovers, and get never a hufband at all. But pray, madam, what became of _Our-afho_?" He remains, faid the lady, ftill unmarried, and hath applied himfelf fo ftrictly to his bufinefs, that he hath raifed, I hear, a very confiderable fortune. And what is remarkable, they fay he never hears the name of Leonora without a figh, nor hath ever uttered one fyllable to charge her with her ill-conduct towards him. CHAPTER VII. _A very fhort chapter, in which parfon Adams went a great way._ The lady, having finifhed her ftory, received the thanks of the company; and now Jofeph, putting his head out of the coach, cried out, "Never believe me if yonder be not our parfon Adams walking along without his horfe!"--"On my word, and fo he is," fays Slipflop: "and as fure as twopence he hath left him behind at the inn." Indeed, true it is, the parfon had exhibited a frefh inftance of his abfence of mind; for he was fo pleafed with having got Jofeph into the coach, that he never once thought of the beaft in the ftable; and, finding his legs as nimble as he defired, he fallied out, brandifhing a crabftick, and had kept on before the coach, mending and flackening his pace occafionally, fo that he had never been much more or lefs than a quarter of a mile diftant from it. Mrs Slipflop defired the coachman to overtake him, which he attempted, but in vain; for the fafter he drove the fafter ran the parfon, often crying out, "Aye, aye, catch me if you can;" till at length the coachman fwore he would as foon attempt to drive after a greyhound, and, giving the parfon two or three hearty curfes, he cry'd, "Softly, foftly, boys," to his horfes, which the civil beafts immediately obeyed. But we will be more courteous to our reader than he was to Mrs Slipflop; and, leaving the coach and its company to purfue their journey, we will carry our reader on after parfon Adams, who ftretched forwards without once looking behind him, till, having left the coach full three miles in his rear, he came to a place where, by keeping the extremeft track to the right, it was juft barely poffible for a human creature to mifs his way. This track, however, did he keep, as indeed he had a wonderful capacity at thefe kinds of bare poffibilities, and, travelling in it about three miles over the plain, he arrived at the fummit of a hill, whence looking a great way backwards, and perceiving no coach in fight, he fat himfelf down on the turf, and, pulling out his Aefchylus, determined to wait here for its arrival. He had not fat long here before a gun going off very near, a little ftartled him; he looked up and faw a gentleman within a hundred paces taking up a partridge which he had juft fhot. Adams ftood up and prefented a figure to the gentleman which would have moved laughter in many; for his caffock had juft again fallen down below his greatcoat, that is to fay, it reached his knees, whereas the fkirts of his greatcoat defcended no lower than half-way down his thighs; but the gentleman's mirth gave way to his furprize at beholding fuch a perfonage in fuch a place. Adams, advancing to the gentleman, told him he hoped he had good fport, to which the other anfwered, "Very little."--"I fee, fir," fays Adams, "you have fmote one partridge;" to which the fportfman made no reply, but proceeded to charge his piece. Whilft the gun was charging, Adams remained in filence, which he at laft broke by obferving that it was a delightful evening. The gentleman, who had at firft fight conceived a very diftafteful opinion of the parfon, began, on perceiving a book in his hand and fmoaking likewife the information of the caffock, to change his thoughts, and made a fmall advance to converfation on his fide by faying, "Sir, I fuppofe you are not one of thefe parts?" Adams immediately told him, "No; that he was a traveller, and invited by the beauty of the evening and the place to repofe a little and amufe himfelf with reading."--"I may as well repofe myfelf too," faid the fportfman, "for I have been out this whole afternoon, and the devil a bird have I feen till I came hither." "Perhaps then the game is not very plenty hereabouts?" cries Adams. "No, fir," faid the gentleman: "the foldiers, who are quartered in the neighbourhood, have killed it all."--"It is very probable," cries Adams, "for fhooting is their profeffion."--"Ay, fhooting the game," anfwered the other; "but I don't fee they are fo forward to fhoot our enemies. I don't like that affair of Carthagena; if I had been there, I believe I fhould have done other-guefs things, d--n me: what's a man's life when his country demands it? a man who won't facrifice his life for his country deferves to be hanged, d--n me." Which words he fpoke with fo violent a gefture, fo loud a voice, fo ftrong an accent, and fo fierce a countenance, that he might have frightened a captain of trained bands at the head of his company; but Mr Adams was not greatly fubject to fear; he told him intrepidly that he very much approved his virtue, but difliked his fwearing, and begged him not to addict himfelf to fo bad a cuftom, without which he faid he might fight as bravely as Achilles did. Indeed he was charmed with this difcourfe; he told the gentleman he would willingly have gone many miles to have met a man of his generous way of thinking; that, if he pleafed to fit down, he fhould be greatly delighted to commune with him; for, though he was a clergyman, he would himfelf be ready, if thereto called, to lay down his life for his country. The gentleman fat down, and Adams by him; and then the latter began, as in the following chapter, a difcourfe which we have placed by itfelf, as it is not only the moft curious in this but perhaps in any other book. CHAPTER VIII. _A notable differtation by Mr Abraham Adams; wherein that gentleman appears in a political light._ "I do affure you, fir" (fays he, taking the gentleman by the hand), "I am heartily glad to meet with a man of your kidney; for, though I am a poor parfon, I will be bold to fay I am an honeft man, and would not do an ill thing to be made a bifhop; nay, though it hath not fallen in my way to offer fo noble a facrifice, I have not been without opportunities of fuffering for the fake of my confcience, I thank Heaven for them; for I have had relations, though I fay it, who made fome figure in the world; particularly a nephew, who was a fhopkeeper and an alderman of a corporation. He was a good lad, and was under my care when a boy; and I believe would do what I bade him to his dying day. Indeed, it looks like extreme vanity in me to affect being a man of fuch confequence as to have fo great an intereft in an alderman; but others have thought fo too, as manifeftly appeared by the rector, whofe curate I formerly was, fending for me on the approach of an election, and telling me, if I expected to continue in his cure, that I muft bring my nephew to vote for one Colonel Courtly, a gentleman whom I had never heard tidings of till that inftant. I told the rector I had no power over my nephew's vote (God forgive me for fuch prevarication!); that I fuppofed he would give it according to his confcience; that I would by no means endeavour to influence him to give it otherwife. He told me it was in vain to equivocate; that he knew I had already fpoke to him in favour of efquire Fickle, my neighbour; and, indeed, it was true I had; for it was at a feafon when the church was in danger, and when all good men expected they knew not what would happen to us all. I then anfwered boldly, if he thought I had given my promife, he affronted me in propofing any breach of it. Not to be too prolix; I perfevered, and fo did my nephew, in the efquire's intereft, who was chofe chiefly through his means; and fo I loft my curacy, Well, fir, but do you think the efquire ever mentioned a word of the church? _Ne verbum quidem, ut ita dicam_: within two years he got a place, and hath ever fince lived in London; where I have been informed (but God forbid I fhould believe that,) that he never fo much as goeth to church. I remained, fir, a confiderable time without any cure, and lived a full month on one funeral fermon, which I preached on the indifpofition of a clergyman; but this by the bye. At laft, when Mr Fickle got his place, Colonel Courtly ftood again; and who fhould make intereft for him but Mr Fickle himfelf! that very identical Mr Fickle, who had formerly told me the colonel was an enemy to both the church and ftate, had the confidence to follicit my nephew for him; and the colonel himfelf offered me to make me chaplain to his regiment, which I refufed in favour of Sir Oliver Hearty, who told us he would facrifice everything to his country; and I believe he would, except his hunting, which he ftuck fo clofe to, that in five years together he went but twice up to parliament; and one of thofe times, I have been told, never was within fight of the Houfe. However, he was a worthy man, and the beft friend I ever had; for, by his intereft with a bifhop, he got me replaced into my curacy, and gave me eight pounds out of his own pocket to buy me a gown and caffock, and furnifh my houfe. He had our intereft while he lived, which was not many years. On his death I had frefh applications made to me; for all the world knew the intereft I had with my good nephew, who now was a leading man in the corporation; and Sir Thomas Booby, buying the eftate which had been Sir Oliver's, propofed himfelf a candidate. He was then a young gentleman juft come from his travels; and it did me good to hear him difcourfe on affairs which, for my part, I knew nothing of. If I had been mafter of a thoufand votes he fhould have had them all. I engaged my nephew in his intereft, and he was elected; and a very fine parliament-man he was. They tell me he made fpeeches of an hour long, and, I have been told, very fine ones; but he could never perfuade the parliament to be of his opinion. _Non omnia poffumus omnes_. He promifed me a living, poor man! and I believe I fhould have had it, but an accident happened, which was, that my lady had promifed it before, unknown to him. This, indeed, I never heard till afterwards; for my nephew, who died about a month before the incumbent, always told me I might be affured of it. Since that time, Sir Thomas, poor man, had always fo much bufinefs, that he never could find leifure to fee me. I believe it was partly my lady's fault too, who did not think my drefs good enough for the gentry at her table. However, I muft do him the juftice to fay he never was ungrateful; and I have always found his kitchen, and his cellar too, open to me: many a time, after fervice on a Sunday--for I preach at four churches--have I recruited my fpirits with a glafs of his ale. Since my nephew's death, the corporation is in other hands; and I am not a man of that confequence I was formerly. I have now no longer any talents to lay out in the fervice of my country; and to whom nothing is given, of him can nothing be required. However, on all proper feafons, fuch as the approach of an election, I throw a fuitable dafh or two into my fermons; which I have the pleafure to hear is not difagreeable to Sir Thomas and the other honeft gentlemen my neighbours, who have all promifed me thefe five years to procure an ordination for a fon of mine, who is now near thirty, hath an infinite ftock of learning, and is, I thank Heaven, of an unexceptionable life; though, as he was never at an univerfity, the bifhop refufes to ordain him. Too much care cannot indeed be taken in admitting any to the facred office; though I hope he will never act fo as to be a difgrace to any order, but will ferve his God and his country to the utmoft of his power, as I have endeavoured to do before him; nay, and will lay down his life whenever called to that purpofe. I am fure I have educated him in thofe principles; fo that I have acquitted my duty, and fhall have nothing to anfwer for on that account. But I do not diftruft him, for he is a good boy; and if Providence fhould throw it in his way to be of as much confequence in a public light as his father once was, I can anfwer for him he will ufe his talents as honeftly as I have done." CHAPTER IX. _In which the gentleman difcants on bravery and heroic virtue, till an unlucky accident puts an end to the difcourfe._ The gentleman highly commended Mr Adams for his good refolutions, and told him, "He hoped his fon would tread in his fteps;" adding, "that if he would not die for his country, he would not be worthy to live in it. I'd make no more of fhooting a man that would not die for his country, than-- "Sir," faid he, "I have difinherited a nephew, who is in the army, becaufe he would not exchange his commiffion and go to the Weft Indies. I believe the rafcal is a coward, though he pretends to be in love forfooth. I would have all fuch fellows hanged, fir; I would have them hanged." Adams anfwered, "That would be too fevere; that men did not make themfelves; and if fear had too much afcendance in the mind, the man was rather to be pitied than abhorred; that reafon and time might teach him to fubdue it." He faid, "A man might be a coward at one time, and brave at another. Homer," fays he, "who fo well underftood and copied Nature, hath taught us this leffon; for Paris fights and Hector runs away. Nay, we have a mighty inftance of this in the hiftory of later ages, no longer ago than the 705th year of Rome, when the great Pompey, who had won fo many battles and been honoured with fo many triumphs, and of whofe valour feveral authors, efpecially Cicero and Paterculus, have formed fuch elogiums; this very Pompey left the battle of Pharfalia before he had loft it, and retreated to his tent, where he fat like the moft pufillanimous rafcal in a fit of defpair, and yielded a victory, which was to determine the empire of the world, to Caefar. I am not much travelled in the hiftory of modern times, that is to fay, thefe laft thoufand years; but thofe who are can, I make no queftion, furnifh you with parallel inftances." He concluded, therefore, that, had he taken any fuch hafty refolutions againft his nephew, he hoped he would confider better, and retract them. The gentleman anfwered with great warmth, and talked much of courage and his country, till, perceiving it grew late, he afked Adams, "What place he intended for that night?" He told him, "He waited there for the ftage-coach."--"The ftage-coach, fir!" faid the gentleman; "they are all paffed by long ago. You may fee the laft yourfelf almoft three miles before us."--"I proteft and fo they are," cries Adams; "then I muft make hafte and follow them." The gentleman told him, "he would hardly be able to overtake them; and that, if he did not know his way, he would be in danger of lofing himfelf on the downs, for it would be prefently dark; and he might ramble about all night, and perhaps find himfelf farther from his journey's end in the morning than he was now." He advifed him, therefore, "to accompany him to his houfe, which was very little out of his way," affuring him "that he would find fome country fellow in his parifh who would conduct him for fixpence to the city where he was going." Adams accepted this propofal, and on they travelled, the gentleman renewing his difcourfe on courage, and the infamy of not being ready, at all times, to facrifice our lives to our country. Night overtook them much about the fame time as they arrived near fome bufhes; whence, on a fudden, they heard the moft violent fhrieks imaginable in a female voice. Adams offered to fnatch the gun out of his companion's hand. "What are you doing?" faid he. "Doing!" faid Adams; "I am haftening to the affiftance of the poor creature whom fome villains are murdering." "You are not mad enough, I hope," fays the gentleman, trembling: "do you confider this gun is only charged with fhot, and that the robbers are moft probably furnifhed with piftols loaded with bullets? This is no bufinefs of ours; let us make as much hafte as poffible out of the way, or we may fall into their hands ourfelves." The fhrieks now increafing, Adams made no anfwer, but fnapt his fingers, and, brandifhing his crabftick, made directly to the place whence the voice iffued; and the man of courage made as much expedition towards his own home, whither he efcaped in a very fhort time without once looking behind him; where we will leave him, to contemplate his own bravery, and to cenfure the want of it in others, and return to the good Adams, who, on coming up to the place whence the noife proceeded, found a woman ftruggling with a man, who had thrown her on the ground, and had almoft overpowered her. The great abilities of Mr Adams were not neceffary to have formed a right judgment of this affair on the firft fight. He did not, therefore, want the entreaties of the poor wretch to affift her; but, lifting up his crabftick, he immediately levelled a blow at that part of the ravifher's head where, according to the opinion of the ancients, the brains of fome perfons are depofited, and which he had undoubtedly let forth, had not Nature (who, as wife men have obferved, equips all creatures with what is moft expedient for them) taken a provident care (as fhe always doth with thofe fhe intends for encounters) to make this part of the head three times as thick as thofe of ordinary men who are defigned to exercife talents which are vulgarly called rational, and for whom, as brains are neceffary, fhe is obliged to leave fome room for them in the cavity of the fkull; whereas, thofe ingredients being entirely ufelefs to perfons of the heroic calling, fhe hath an opportunity of thickening the bone, fo as to make it lefs fubject to any impreffion, or liable to be cracked or broken: and indeed, in fome who are predeftined to the command of armies and empires, fhe is fuppofed fometimes to make that part perfectly folid. As a game cock, when engaged in amorous toying with a hen, if perchance he efpies another cock at hand, immediately quits his female, and oppofes himfelf to his rival, fo did the ravifher, on the information of the crabftick, immediately leap from the woman and haften to affail the man. He had no weapons but what Nature had furnifhed him with. However, he clenched his fift, and prefently darted it at that part of Adams's breaft where the heart is lodged. Adams ftaggered at the violence of the blow, when, throwing away his ftaff, he likewife clenched that fift which we have before commemorated, and would have difcharged it full in the breaft of his antagonift, had he not dexteroufly caught it with his left hand, at the fame time darting his head (which fome modern heroes of the lower clafs ufe, like the battering-ram of the ancients, for a weapon of offence; another reafon to admire the cunningnefs of Nature, in compofing it of thofe impenetrable materials); dafhing his head, I fay, into the ftomach of Adams, he tumbled him on his back; and, not having any regard to the laws of heroifm, which would have reftrained him from any farther attack on his enemy till he was again on his legs, he threw himfelf upon him, and, laying hold on the ground with his left hand, he with his right belaboured the body of Adams till he was weary, and indeed till he concluded (to ufe the language of fighting) "that he had done his bufinefs;" or, in the language of poetry, "that he had fent him to the fhades below;" in plain Englifh, "that he was dead." But Adams, who was no chicken, and could bear a drubbing as well as any boxing champion in the univerfe, lay ftill only to watch his opportunity; and now, perceiving his antagonift to pant with his labours, he exerted his utmoft force at once, and with fuch fuccefs that he overturned him, and became his fuperior; when, fixing one of his knees in his breaft, he cried out in an exulting voice, "It is my turn now;" and, after a few minutes' conftant application, he gave him fo dexterous a blow juft under his chin that the fellow no longer retained any motion, and Adams began to fear he had ftruck him once too often; for he often afferted "he fhould be concerned to have the blood of even the wicked upon him." Adams got up and called aloud to the young woman. "Be of good cheer, damfel," faid he, "you are no longer in danger of your ravifher, who, I am terribly afraid, lies dead at my feet; but God forgive me what I have done in defence of innocence!" The poor wretch, who had been fome time in recovering ftrength enough to rife, and had afterwards, during the engagement, ftood trembling, being difabled by fear even from running away, hearing her champion was victorious, came up to him, but not without apprehenfions even of her deliverer; which, however, fhe was foon relieved from by his courteous behaviour and gentle words. They were both ftanding by the body, which lay motionlefs on the ground, and which Adams wifhed to fee ftir much more than the woman did, when he earneftly begged her to tell him "by what miffortune fhe came, at fuch a time of night, into fo lonely a place." She acquainted him, "She was travelling towards London, and had accidentally met with the perfon from whom he had delivered her, who told her he was likewife on his journey to the fame place, and would keep her company; an offer which, fufpecting no harm, fhe had accepted; that he told her they were at a fmall diftance from an inn where fhe might take up her lodging that evening, and he would fhow her a nearer way to it than by following the road; that if fhe had fufpected him (which fhe did not, he fpoke fo kindly to her), being alone on thefe downs in the dark, fhe had no human means to avoid him; that, therefore, fhe put her whole truft in Providence, and walked on, expecting every moment to arrive at the inn; when on a fudden, being come to thofe bufhes, he defired her to ftop, and after fome rude kiffes, which fhe refifted, and fome entreaties, which fhe rejected, he laid violent hands on her, and was attempting to execute his wicked will, when, fhe thanked G--, he timely came up and prevented him." Adams encouraged her for faying fhe had put her whole truft in Providence, and told her, "He doubted not but Providence had fent him to her deliverance, as a reward for that truft. He wifhed indeed he had not deprived the wicked wretch of life, but G--'s will be done;" faid, "He hoped the goodnefs of his intention would excufe him in the next world, and he trufted in her evidence to acquit him in this." He was then filent, and began to confider with himfelf whether it would be properer to make his efcape, or to deliver himfelf into the hands of juftice; which meditation ended as the reader will fee in the next chapter. CHAPTER X. _Giving an account of the ftrange cataftrophe of the preceding adventure, which drew poor Adams into frefh calamities; and who the woman was who owed the prefervation of her chaftity to his victorious arm._ The filence of Adams, added to the darknefs of the night and lonelinefs of the place, ftruck dreadful apprehenfion into the poor woman's mind; fhe began to fear as great an enemy in her deliverer as he had delivered her from; and as fhe had not light enough to difcover the age of Adams, and the benevolence vifible in his countenance, fhe fufpected he had ufed her as fome very honeft men have ufed their country; and had refcued her out of the hands of one rifler in order to rifle her himfelf. Such were the fufpicions fhe drew from his filence; but indeed they were ill-grounded. He ftood over his vanquifhed enemy, wifely weighing in his mind the objections which might be made to either of the two methods of proceeding mentioned in the laft chapter, his judgment fometimes inclining to the one, and fometimes to the other; for both feemed to him fo equally advifable and fo equally dangerous, that probably he would have ended his days, at leaft two or three of them, on that very fpot, before he had taken any refolution; at length he lifted up his eyes, and fpied a light at a diftance, to which he inftantly addreffed himfelf with _Heus tu, traveller, heus tu!_ He prefently heard feveral voices, and perceived the light approaching toward him. The perfons who attended the light began fome to laugh, others to fing, and others to hollow, at which the woman teftified fome fear (for fhe had concealed her fufpicions of the parfon himfelf); but Adams faid, "Be of good cheer, damfel, and repofe thy truft in the fame Providence which hath hitherto protected thee, and never will forfake the innocent." Thefe people, who now approached, were no other, reader, than a fet of young fellows, who came to thefe bufhes in purfuit of a diverfion which they call bird-batting. This, if you are ignorant of it (as perhaps if thou haft never travelled beyond Kenfington, Iflington, Hackney, or the Borough, thou mayft be), I will inform thee, is performed by holding a large clap-net before a lanthorn, and at the fame time beating the bufhes; for the birds, when they are difturbed from their places of reft, or rooft, immediately make to the light, and fo are inticed within the net. Adams immediately told them what happened, and defired them to hold the lanthorn to the face of the man on the ground, for he feared he had fmote him fatally. But indeed his fears were frivolous; for the fellow, though he had been ftunned by the laft blow he received, had long fince recovered his fenfes, and, finding himfelf quit of Adams, had liftened attentively to the difcourfe between him and the young woman; for whofe departure he had patiently waited, that he might likewife withdraw himfelf, having no longer hopes of fucceeding in his defires, which were moreover almoft as well cooled by Mr Adams as they could have been by the young woman herfelf had he obtained his utmoft wifh. This fellow, who had a readinefs at improving any accident, thought he might now play a better part than that of a dead man; and, accordingly, the moment the candle was held to his face he leapt up, and, laying hold on Adams, cried out, "No, villain, I am not dead, though you and your wicked whore might well think me fo, after the barbarous cruelties you have exercifed on me. Gentlemen," faid he, "you are luckily come to the affiftance of a poor traveller, who would otherwife have been robbed and murdered by this vile man and woman, who led me hither out of my way from the high-road, and both falling on me have ufed me as you fee." Adams was going to anfwer, when one of the young fellows cried, "D--n them, let's carry them both before the juftice." The poor woman began to tremble, and Adams lifted up his voice, but in vain. Three or four of them laid hands on him; and one holding the lanthorn to his face, they all agreed he had the moft villainous countenance they ever beheld; and an attorney's clerk, who was of the company, declared he was fure he had remembered him at the bar. As to the woman, her hair was difhevelled in the ftruggle, and her nofe had bled; fo that they could not perceive whether fhe was handfome or ugly, but they faid her fright plainly difcovered her guilt. And fearching her pockets, as they did thofe of Adams, for money, which the fellow faid he had loft, they found in her pocket a purfe with fome gold in it, which abundantly convinced them, efpecially as the fellow offered to fwear to it. Mr Adams was found to have no more than one halfpenny about him. This the clerk faid "was a great prefumption that he was an old offender, by cunningly giving all the booty to the woman." To which all the reft readily affented. This accident promifing them better fport than what they had propofed, they quitted their intention of catching birds, and unanimoufly refolved to proceed to the juftice with the offenders. Being informed what a defperate fellow Adams was, they tied his hands behind him; and, having hid their nets among the bufhes, and the lanthorn being carried before them, they placed the two prifoners in their front, and then began their march; Adams not only fubmitting patiently to his own fate, but comforting and encouraging his companion under her fufferings. Whilft they were on their way the clerk informed the reft that this adventure would prove a very beneficial one; for that they would all be entitled to their proportions of 80 for apprehending the robbers. This occafioned a contention concerning the parts which they had feverally borne in taking them; one infifting he ought to have the greateft fhare, for he had firft laid his hands on Adams; another claiming a fuperior part for having firft held the lanthorn to the man's face on the ground, by which, he faid, "the whole was difcovered." The clerk claimed four-fifths of the reward for having propofed to fearch the prifoners, and likewife the carrying them before the juftice: he faid, "Indeed, in ftrict juftice, he ought to have the whole." Thefe claims, however, they at laft confented to refer to a future decifion, but feemed all to agree that the clerk was entitled to a moiety. They then debated what money fhould be allotted to the young fellow who had been employed only in holding the nets. He very modeftly faid, "That he did not apprehend any large proportion would fall to his fhare, but hoped they would allow him fomething; he defired them to confider that they had affigned their nets to his care, which prevented him from being as forward as any in laying hold of the robbers" (for fo thofe innocent people were called); "that if he had not occupied the nets, fome other muft;" concluding, however, "that he fhould be contented with the fmalleft fhare imaginable, and fhould think that rather their bounty than his merit." But they were all unanimous in excluding him from any part whatever, the clerk particularly fwearing, "If they gave him a fhilling they might do what they pleafed with the reft; for he would not concern himfelf with the affair." This contention was fo hot, and fo totally engaged the attention of all the parties, that a dexterous nimble thief, had he been in Mr Adams's fituation, would have taken care to have given the juftice no trouble that evening. Indeed, it required not the art of a Sheppard to efcape, efpecially as the darknefs of the night would have fo much befriended him; but Adams trufted rather to his innocence than his heels, and, without thinking of flight, which was eafy, or refiftance (which was impoffible, as there were fix lufty young fellows, befides the villain himfelf, prefent), he walked with perfect refignation the way they thought proper to conduct him. Adams frequently vented himfelf in ejaculations during their journey; at laft, poor Jofeph Andrews occurring to his mind, he could not refrain fighing forth his name, which being heard by his companion in affliction, fhe cried with fome vehemence, "Sure I fhould know that voice; you cannot certainly, fir, be Mr Abraham Adams?"--"Indeed, damfel," fays he, "that is my name; there is fomething alfo in your voice which perfuades me I have heard it before."--"La! fir," fays fhe, "don't you remember poor Fanny?"--"How, Fanny!" anfwered Adams: "indeed I very well remember you; what can have brought you hither?"--"I have told you, fir," replied fhe, "I was travelling towards London; but I thought you mentioned Jofeph Andrews; pray what is become of him?"--"I left him, child, this afternoon," faid Adams, "in the ftage-coach, in his way towards our parifh, whither he is going to fee you."--"To fee me! La, fir," anfwered Fanny, "fure you jeer me; what fhould he be going to fee me for?"--"Can you afk that?" replied Adams. "I hope, Fanny, you are not inconftant; I affure you he deferves much better of you."--"La! Mr Adams," faid fhe, "what is Mr Jofeph to me? I am fure I never had anything to fay to him, but as one fellow-fervant might to another."--"I am forry to hear this," faid Adams; "a virtuous paffion for a young man is what no woman need be afhamed of. You either do not tell me truth, or you are falfe to a very worthy man." Adams then told her what had happened at the inn, to which fhe liftened very attentively; and a figh often efcaped from her, notwithftanding her utmoft endeavours to the contrary; nor could fhe prevent herfelf from afking a thoufand queftions, which would have affured any one but Adams, who never faw farther into people than they defired to let him, of the truth of a paffion fhe endeavoured to conceal. Indeed, the fact was, that this poor girl, having heard of Jofeph's miffortune, by fome of the fervants belonging to the coach which we have formerly mentioned to have ftopt at the inn while the poor youth was confined to his bed, that inftant abandoned the cow fhe was milking, and, taking with her a little bundle of clothes under her arm, and all the money fhe was worth in her own purfe, without confulting any one, immediately fet forward in purfuit of one whom, notwithftanding her fhynefs to the parfon, fhe loved with inexpreffible violence, though with the pureft and moft delicate paffion. This fhynefs, therefore, as we truft it will recommend her character to all our female readers, and not greatly furprize fuch of our males as are well acquainted with the younger part of the other fex, we fhall not give ourfelves any trouble to vindicate. CHAPTER XI. _What happened to them while before the juftice. A chapter very full of learning._ Their fellow-travellers were fo engaged in the hot difpute concerning the divifion of the reward for apprehending thefe innocent people, that they attended very little to their difcourfe. They were now arrived at the juftice's houfe, and had fent one of his fervants in to acquaint his worfhip that they had taken two robbers and brought them before him. The juftice, who was juft returned from a fox-chafe, and had not yet finifhed his dinner, ordered them to carry the prifoners into the ftable, whither they were attended by all the fervants in the houfe, and all the people in the neighbourhood, who flocked together to fee them with as much curiofity as if there was fomething uncommon to be feen, or that a rogue did not look like other people. The juftice, now being in the height of his mirth and his cups, bethought himfelf of the prifoners; and, telling his company he believed they fhould have good fport in their examination, he ordered them into his prefence. They had no fooner entered the room than he began to revile them, faying, "That robberies on the highway were now grown fo frequent, that people could not fleep fafely in their beds, and affured them they both fhould be made examples of at the enfuing affizes." After he had gone on fome time in this manner, he was reminded by his clerk, "That it would be proper to take the depofitions of the witneffes againft them." Which he bid him do, and he would light his pipe in the meantime. Whilft the clerk was employed in writing down the depofition of the fellow who had pretended to be robbed, the juftice employed himfelf in cracking jefts on poor Fanny, in which he was feconded by all the company at table. One afked, "Whether fhe was to be indicted for a highwayman?" Another whifpered in her ear, "If fhe had not provided herfelf a great belly, he was at her fervice." A third faid, "He warranted fhe was a relation of Turpin." To which one of the company, a great wit, fhaking his head, and then his fides, anfwered, "He believed fhe was nearer related to Turpis;" at which there was an univerfal laugh. They were proceeding thus with the poor girl, when fomebody, fmoking the caffock peeping forth from under the greatcoat of Adams, cried out, "What have we here, a parfon?" "How, firrah," fays the juftice, "do you go robbing in the drefs of a clergyman? let me tell you your habit will not entitle you to the benefit of the clergy." "Yes," faid the witty fellow, "he will have one benefit of clergy, he will be exalted above the heads of the people;" at which there was a fecond laugh. And now the witty fpark, feeing his jokes take, began to rife in fpirits; and, turning to Adams, challenged him to cap verfes, and, provoking him by giving the firft blow, he repeated-- _"Molle meum levibus cord eft vilebile telis."_ Upon which Adams, with a look full of ineffable contempt, told him, "He deferved fcourging for his pronunciation." The witty fellow anfwered, "What do you deferve, doctor, for not being able to anfwer the firft time? Why, I'll give one, you blockhead, with an S. _"'Si licet, ut fulvum fpectatur in ignibus haurum.'_ "What, canft not with an M neither? Thou art a pretty fellow for a parfon! Why didft not fteal fome of the parfon's Latin as well as his gown?" Another at the table then anfwered, "If he had, you would have been too hard for him; I remember you at the college a very devil at this fport; I have feen you catch a frefhman, for nobody that knew you would engage with you." "I have forgot thofe things now," cried the wit. "I believe I could have done pretty well formerly. Let's fee, what did I end with?--an M again--aye-- _"'Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.'_ I could have done it once." "Ah! evil betide you, and fo you can now," faid the other: "nobody in this country will undertake you." Adams could hold no longer: "Friend," faid he, "I have a boy not above eight years old who would inftruct thee that the laft verfe runs thus:-- _"'Ut funt Divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.'"_ "I'll hold thee a guinea of that," faid the wit, throwing the money on the table. "And I'll go your halves," cries the other. "Done," anfwered Adams; but upon applying to his pocket he was forced to retract, and own he had no money about him; which fet them all a-laughing, and confirmed the triumph of his adverfary, which was not moderate, any more than the approbation he met with from the whole company, who told Adams he muft go a little longer to fchool before he attempted to attack that gentleman in Latin. The clerk, having finifhed the depofitions, as well of the fellow himfelf, as of thofe who apprehended the prifoners, delivered them to the juftice; who, having fworn the feveral witneffes without reading a fyllable, ordered his clerk to make the mittimus. Adams then faid, "He hoped he fhould not be condemned unheard." "No, no," cries the juftice, "you will be afked what you have to fay for yourfelf when you come on your trial: we are not trying you now; I fhall only commit you to gaol: if you can prove your innocence at fize, you will be found ignoramus, and fo no harm done." "Is it no punifhment, fir, for an innocent man to lie feveral months in gaol?" cries Adams: "I beg you would at leaft hear me before you fign the mittimus." "What fignifies all you can fay?" fays the juftice: "is it not here in black and white againft you? I muft tell you you are a very impertinent fellow to take up fo much of my time. So make hafte with his mittimus." The clerk now acquainted the juftice that among other fufpicious things, as a penknife, &c., found in Adams's pocket, they had difcovered a book written, as he apprehended, in cyphers; for no one could read a word in it. "Ay," fays the juftice, "the fellow may be more than a common robber, he may be in a plot againft the Government. Produce the book." Upon which the poor manufcript of Aefchylus, which Adams had tranfcribed with his own hand, was brought forth; and the juftice, looking at it, fhook his head, and, turning to the prifoner, afked the meaning of thofe cyphers. "Cyphers?" anfwered Adams, "it is a manufcript of Aefchylus." "Who? who?" faid the juftice. Adams repeated, "Aefchylus." "That is an outlandifh name," cried the clerk. "A fictitious name rather, I believe," faid the juftice. One of the company declared it looked very much like Greek. "Greek?" faid the juftice; "why, 'tis all writing." "No," fays the other, "I don't pofitively fay it is fo; for it is a very long time fince I have feen any Greek." "There's one," fays he, turning to the parfon of the parifh, who was prefent, "will tell us immediately." The parfon, taking up the book, and putting on his fpectacles and gravity together, muttered fome words to himfelf, and then pronounced aloud--"Ay, indeed, it is a Greek manufcript; a very fine piece of antiquity. I make no doubt but it was ftolen from the fame clergyman from whom the rogue took the caffock." "What did the rafcal mean by his Aefchylus?" fays the juftice. "Pooh!" anfwered the doctor, with a contemptuous grin, "do you think that fellow knows anything of this book? Aefchylus! ho! ho! I fee now what it is--a manufcript of one of the fathers. I know a nobleman who would give a great deal of money for fuch a piece of antiquity. Ay, ay, queftion and anfwer. The beginning is the catechifm in Greek. Ay, ay, _Pollaki toi_: What's your name?"--"Ay, what's your name?" fays the juftice to Adams; who anfwered, "It is Aefchylus, and I will maintain it."--"Oh! it is," fays the juftice: "make Mr Aefchylus his mittimus. I will teach you to banter me with a falfe name." One of the company, having looked fteadfaftly at Adams, afked him, "If he did not know Lady Booby?" Upon which Adams, prefently calling him to mind, anfwered in a rapture, "O fquire! are you there? I believe you will inform his worfhip I am innocent."--"I can indeed fay," replied the fquire, "that I am very much furprized to fee you in this fituation:" and then, addreffing himfelf to the juftice, he faid, "Sir, I affure you Mr Adams is a clergyman, as he appears, and a gentleman of a very good character. I wifh you would enquire a little farther into this affair; for I am convinced of his innocence."--"Nay," fays the juftice, "if he is a gentleman, and you are fure he is innocent, I don't defire to commit him, not I: I will commit the woman by herfelf, and take your bail for the gentleman: look into the book, clerk, and fee how it is to take bail--come--and make the mittimus for the woman as faft as you can."--"Sir," cries Adams, "I affure you fhe is as innocent as myfelf."--"Perhaps," faid the fquire, "there may be fome miftake! pray let us hear Mr Adams's relation."--"With all my heart," anfwered the juftice; "and give the gentleman a glafs to wet his whiftle before he begins. I know how to behave myfelf to gentlemen as well as another. Nobody can fay I have committed a gentleman fince I have been in the commiffion." Adams then began the narrative, in which, though he was very prolix, he was uninterrupted, unlefs by feveral hums and hahs of the juftice, and his defire to repeat thofe parts which feemed to him moft material. When he had finifhed, the juftice, who, on what the fquire had faid, believed every fyllable of his ftory on his bare affirmation, notwithftanding the depofitions on oath to the contrary, began to let loofe feveral rogues and rafcals againft the witnefs, whom he ordered to ftand forth, but in vain; the faid witnefs, long fince finding what turn matters were likely to take, had privily withdrawn, without attending the iffue. The juftice now flew into a violent paffion, and was hardly prevailed with not to commit the innocent fellows who had been impofed on as well as himfelf. He fwore, "They had beft find out the fellow who was guilty of perjury, and bring him before him within two days, or he would bind them all over to their good behaviour." They all promifed to ufe their beft endeavours to that purpofe, and were difmiffed. Then the juftice infifted that Mr Adams fhould fit down and take a glafs with him; and the parfon of the parifh delivered him back the manufcript without faying a word; nor would Adams, who plainly difcerned his ignorance, expofe it. As for Fanny, fhe was, at her own requeft, recommended to the care of a maid-fervant of the houfe, who helped her to new drefs and clean herfelf. The company in the parlour had not been long feated before they were alarmed with a horrible uproar from without, where the perfons who had apprehended Adams and Fanny had been regaling, according to the cuftom of the houfe, with the juftice's ftrong beer. Thefe were all fallen together by the ears, and were cuffing each other without any mercy. The juftice himfelf fallied out, and with the dignity of his prefence foon put an end to the fray. On his return into the parlour, he reported, "That the occafion of the quarrel was no other than a difpute to whom, if Adams had been convicted, the greater fhare of the reward for apprehending him had belonged." All the company laughed at this, except Adams, who, taking his pipe from his mouth, fetched a deep groan, and faid, "He was concerned to fee fo litigious a temper in men. That he remembered a ftory fomething like it in one of the parifhes where his cure lay:--There was," continued he, "a competition between three young fellows for the place of the clerk, which I difpofed of, to the beft of my abilities, according to merit; that is, I gave it to him who had the happieft knack at fetting a pfalm. The clerk was no fooner eftablifhed in his place than a contention began between the two difappointed candidates concerning their excellence; each contending on whom, had they two been the only competitors, my election would have fallen. This difpute frequently difturbed the congregation, and introduced a difcord into the pfalmody, till I was forced to filence them both. But, alas! the litigious fpirit could not be ftifled; and, being no longer able to vent itfelf in finging, it now broke forth in fighting. It produced many battles (for they were very near a match), and I believe would have ended fatally, had not the death of the clerk given me an opportunity to promote one of them to his place; which prefently put an end to the difpute, and entirely reconciled the contending parties." Adams then proceeded to make fome philofophical obfervations on the folly of growing warm in difputes in which neither party is interefted. He then applied himfelf vigoroufly to fmoaking; and a long filence enfued, which was at length broke by the juftice, who began to fing forth his own praifes, and to value himfelf exceedingly on his nice difcernment in the caufe which had lately been before him. He was quickly interrupted by Mr Adams, between whom and his worfhip a difpute now arofe, whether he ought not, in ftrictnefs of law, to have committed him, the faid Adams; in which the latter maintained he ought to have been committed, and the juftice as vehemently held he ought not. This had moft probably produced a quarrel (for both were very violent and pofitive in their opinions), had not Fanny accidentally heard that a young fellow was going from the juftice's houfe to the very inn where the ftage-coach in which Jofeph was, put up. Upon this news, fhe immediately fent for the parfon out of the parlour. Adams, when he found her refolute to go (though fhe would not own the reafon, but pretended fhe could not bear to fee the faces of thofe who had fufpected her of fuch a crime), was as fully determined to go with her; he accordingly took leave of the juftice and company: and fo ended a difpute in which the law feemed fhamefully to intend to fet a magiftrate and a divine together by the ears. CHAPTER XII. _A very delightful adventure, as well to the perfons concerned as to the good-natured reader._ Adams, Fanny, and the guide, fet out together about one in the morning, the moon being then juft rifen. They had not gone above a mile before a moft violent ftorm of rain obliged them to take fhelter in an inn, or rather alehoufe, where Adams immediately procured himfelf a good fire, a toaft and ale, and a pipe, and began to fmoke with great content, utterly forgetting everything that had happened. Fanny fat likewife down by the fire; but was much more impatient at the ftorm. She prefently engaged the eyes of the hoft, his wife, the maid of the houfe, and the young fellow who was their guide; they all conceived they had never feen anything half fo handfome; and indeed, reader, if thou art of an amorous hue, I advife thee to fkip over the next paragraph; which, to render our hiftory perfect, we are obliged to fet down, humbly hoping that we may efcape the fate of Pygmalion; for if it fhould happen to us, or to thee, to be ftruck with this picture, we fhould be perhaps in as helplefs a condition as Narciffus, and might fay to ourfelves, _Quod petis eft nufquam_. Or, if the fineft features in it fhould fet Lady ----'s image before our eyes, we fhould be ftill in as bad a fituation, and might fay to our defires, _Coelum ipfum petimus ftultitia_. Fanny was now in the nineteenth year of her age; fhe was tall and delicately fhaped; but not one of thofe flender young women who feem rather intended to hang up in the hall of an anatomift than for any other purpofe. On the contrary, fhe was fo plump that fhe feemed burfting through her tight ftays, efpecially in the part which confined her fwelling breafts. Nor did her hips want the affiftance of a hoop to extend them. The exact fhape of her arms denoted the form of thofe limbs which fhe concealed; and though they were a little reddened by her labour, yet, if her fleeve flipped above her elbow, or her handkerchief difcovered any part of her neck, a whitenefs appeared which the fineft Italian paint would be unable to reach. Her hair was of a chefnut brown, and nature had been extremely lavifh to her of it, which fhe had cut, and on Sundays ufed to curl down her neck, in the modern fafhion. Her forehead was high, her eyebrows arched, and rather full than otherwife. Her eyes black and fparkling; her nofe juft inclining to the Roman; her lips red and moift, and her underlip, according to the opinion of the ladies, too pouting. Her teeth were white, but not exactly even. The fmall-pox had left one only mark on her chin, which was fo large, it might have been miftaken for a dimple, had not her left cheek produced one fo near a neighbour to it, that the former ferved only for a foil to the latter. Her complexion was fair, a little injured by the fun, but overfpread with fuch a bloom that the fineft ladies would have exchanged all their white for it: add to thefe a countenance in which, though fhe was extremely bafhful, a fenfibility appeared almoft incredible; and a fweetnefs, whenever fhe fmiled, beyond either imitation or defcription. To conclude all, fhe had a natural gentility, fuperior to the acquifition of art, and which furprized all who beheld her. This lovely creature was fitting by the fire with Adams, when her attention was fuddenly engaged by a voice from an inner room, which fung the following fong:-- THE SONG. Say, Chloe, where muft the fwain ftray Who is by thy beauties undone? To wafh their remembrance away, To what diftant Lethe muft run? The wretch who is fentenced to die May efcape, and leave juftice behind; From his country perhaps he may fly, But oh! can he fly from his mind? O rapture! unthought of before, To be thus of Chloe poffefs'd; Nor fhe, nor no tyrant's hard power, Her image can tear from my breaft. But felt not Narciffus more joy, With his eyes he beheld his loved charms? Yet what he beheld the fond boy More eagerly wifh'd in his arms. How can it thy dear image be Which fills thus my bofom with woe? Can aught bear refemblance to thee Which grief and not joy can beftow? This counterfeit fnatch from my heart, Ye pow'rs, tho' with torment I rave, Tho' mortal will prove the fell fmart: I then fhall find reft in my grave. Ah, fee the dear nymph o'er the plain Come fmiling and tripping along! A thoufand Loves dance in her train, The Graces around her all throng. To meet her foft Zephyrus flies, And wafts all the fweets from the flowers, Ah, rogue I whilft he kiffes her eyes, More fweets from her breath he devours. My foul, whilft I gaze, is on fire: But her looks were fo tender and kind, My hope almoft reach'd my defire, And left lame defpair far behind. Tranfported with madnefs, I flew, And eagerly feized on my blifs; Her bofom but half fhe withdrew, But half fhe refufed my fond kifs. Advances like thefe made me bold; I whifper'd her--Love, we're alone.-- The reft let immortals unfold; No language can tell but their own. Ah, Chloe, expiring, I cried, How long I thy cruelty bore! Ah, Strephon, fhe blufhing replied, You ne'er was fo preffing before. Adams had been ruminating all this time on a paffage in Aefchylus, without attending in the leaft to the voice, though one of the moft melodious that ever was heard, when, cafting his eyes on Fanny, he cried out, "Blefs us, you look extremely pale!"--"Pale! Mr Adams," fays fhe; "O Jefus!" and fell backwards in her chair. Adams jumped up, flung his Aefchylus into the fire, and fell a-roaring to the people of the houfe for help. He foon fummoned every one into the room, and the fongfter among the reft; but, O reader! when this nightingale, who was no other than Jofeph Andrews himfelf, faw his beloved Fanny in the fituation we have defcribed her, canft thou conceive the agitations of his mind? If thou canft not, waive that meditation to behold his happinefs, when, clafping her in his arms, he found life and blood returning into her cheeks: when he faw her open her beloved eyes, and heard her with the fofteft accent whifper, "Are you Jofeph Andrews?"--"Art thou my Fanny?" he anfwered eagerly: and, pulling her to his heart, he imprinted numberlefs kiffes on her lips, without confidering who were prefent. If prudes are offended at the lufcioufnefs of this picture, they may take their eyes off from it, and furvey parfon Adams dancing about the room in a rapture of joy. Some philofophers may perhaps doubt whether he was not the happieft of the three: for the goodnefs of his heart enjoyed the bleffings which were exulting in the breafts of both the other two, together with his own. But we fhall leave fuch difquifitions, as too deep for us, to thofe who are building fome favourite hypothefis, which they will refufe no metaphyfical rubbifh to erect and fupport: for our part, we give it clearly on the fide of Jofeph, whofe happinefs was not only greater than the parfon's, but of longer duration: for as foon as the firft tumults of Adams's rapture were over he caft his eyes towards the fire, where Aefchylus lay expiring; and immediately refcued the poor remains, to wit, the fheepfkin covering, of his dear friend, which was the work of his own hands, and had been his infeparable companion for upwards of thirty years. Fanny had no fooner perfectly recovered herfelf than fhe began to reftrain the impetuofity of her tranfports; and, reflecting on what fhe had done and fuffered in the prefence of fo many, fhe was immediately covered with confufion; and, pufhing Jofeph gently from her, fhe begged him to be quiet, nor would admit of either kifs or embrace any longer. Then, feeing Mrs Slipflop, fhe curtfied, and offered to advance to her; but that high woman would not return her curtfies; but, cafting her eyes another way, immediately withdrew into another room, muttering, as fhe went, fhe wondered who the creature was. CHAPTER XIII. _A differtation concerning high people and low people, with Mrs Slipflop's departure in no very good temper of mind, and the evil plight in which fhe left Adams and his company._ It will doubtlefs feem extremely odd to many readers, that Mrs Slipflop, who had lived feveral years in the fame houfe with Fanny, fhould, in a fhort feparation, utterly forget her. And indeed the truth is, that fhe remembered her very well. As we would not willingly, therefore, that anything fhould appear unnatural in this our hiftory, we will endeavour to explain the reafons of her conduct; nor do we doubt being able to fatiffy the moft curious reader that Mrs Slipflop did not in the leaft deviate from the common road in this behaviour; and, indeed, had fhe done otherwife, fhe muft have defcended below herfelf, and would have very juftly been liable to cenfure. Be it known then, that the human fpecies are divided into two forts of people, to wit, high people and low people. As by high people I would not be underftood to mean perfons literally born higher in their dimenfions than the reft of the fpecies, nor metaphorically thofe of exalted characters or abilities; fo by low people I cannot be conftrued to intend the reverfe. High people fignify no other than people of fafhion, and low people thofe of no fafhion. Now, this word fafhion hath by long ufe loft its original meaning, from which at prefent it gives us a very different idea; for I am deceived if by perfons of fafhion we do not generally include a conception of birth and accomplifhments fuperior to the herd of mankind; whereas, in reality, nothing more was originally meant by a perfon of fafhion than a perfon who dreft himfelf in the fafhion of the times; and the word really and truly fignifies no more at this day. Now, the world being thus divided into people of fafhion and people of no fafhion, a fierce contention arofe between them; nor would thofe of one party, to avoid fufpicion, be feen publicly to fpeak to thofe of the other, though they often held a very good correfpondence in private. In this contention it is difficult to fay which party fucceeded; for, whilft the people of fafhion feized feveral places to their own ufe, fuch as courts, affemblies, operas, balls, &c., the people of no fafhion, befides one royal place, called his Majefty's Bear-garden, have been in conftant poffeffion of all hops, fairs, revels, &c. Two places have been agreed to be divided between them, namely, the church and the playhoufe, where they fegregate themfelves from each other in a remarkable manner; for, as the people of fafhion exalt themfelves at church over the heads of the people of no fafhion, fo in the playhoufe they abafe themfelves in the fame degree under their feet. This diftinction I have never met with any one able to account for: it is fufficient that, fo far from looking on each other as brethren in the Chriftian language, they feem fcarce to regard each other as of the fame fpecies. This, the terms "ftrange perfons, people one does not know, the creature, wretches, beafts, brutes," and many other appellations evidently demonftrate; which Mrs Slipflop, having often heard her miftrefs ufe, thought fhe had alfo a right to ufe in her turn; and perhaps fhe was not miftaken; for thefe two parties, efpecially thofe bordering nearly on each other, to wit, the loweft of the high, and the higheft of the low, often change their parties according to place and time; for thofe who are people of fafhion in one place are often people of no fafhion in another. And with regard to time, it may not be unpleafant to furvey the picture of dependance like a kind of ladder; as, for inftance; early in the morning arifes the poftillion, or fome other boy, which great families, no more than great fhips, are without, and falls to brufhing the clothes and cleaning the fhoes of John the footman; who, being dreft himfelf, applies his hands to the fame labours for Mr Second-hand, the fquire's gentleman; the gentleman in the like manner, a little later in the day, attends the fquire; the fquire is no fooner equipped than he attends the levee of my lord; which is no fooner over than my lord himfelf is feen at the levee of the favourite, who, after the hour of homage is at an end, appears himfelf to pay homage to the levee of his fovereign. Nor is there, perhaps, in this whole ladder of dependance, any one ftep at a greater diftance from the other than the firft from the fecond; fo that to a philofopher the queftion might only feem, whether you would chufe to be a great man at fix in the morning, or at two in the afternoon. And yet there are fcarce two of thefe who do not think the leaft familiarity with the perfons below them a condefcenfion, and, if they were to go one ftep farther, a degradation. And now, reader, I hope thou wilt pardon this long digreffion, which feemed to me neceffary to vindicate the great character of Mrs Slipflop from what low people, who have never feen high people, might think an abfurdity; but we who know them muft have daily found very high perfons know us in one place and not in another, to-day and not to-morrow; all which it is difficult to account for otherwife than I have here endeavoured; and perhaps, if the gods, according to the opinion of fome, made men only to laugh at them, there is no part of our behaviour which anfwers the end of our creation better than this. But to return to our hiftory: Adams, who knew no more of this than the cat which fat on the table, imagining Mrs Slipflop's memory had been much worfe than it really was, followed her into the next room, crying out, "Madam Slipflop, here is one of your old acquaintance; do but fee what a fine woman fhe is grown fince fhe left Lady Booby's fervice."--"I think I reflect fomething of her," anfwered fhe, with great dignity, "but I can't remember all the inferior fervants in our family." She then proceeded to fatiffy Adams's curiofity, by telling him, "When fhe arrived at the inn, fhe found a chaife ready for her; that, her lady being expected very fhortly in the country, fhe was obliged to make the utmoft hafte; and, in commenfuration of Jofeph's lamenefs, fhe had taken him with her;" and laftly, "that the exceffive virulence of the ftorm had driven them into the houfe where he found them." After which, fhe acquainted Adams with his having left his horfe, and expreft fome wonder at his having ftrayed fo far out of his way, and at meeting him, as fhe faid, "in the company of that wench, who fhe feared was no better than fhe fhould be." The horfe was no fooner put into Adams's head but he was immediately driven out by this reflection on the character of Fanny. He protefted, "He believed there was not a chafter damfel in the univerfe. I heartily wifh, I heartily wifh," cried he (fnapping his fingers), "that all her betters were as good." He then proceeded to inform her of the accident of their meeting; but when he came to mention the circumftance of delivering her from the rape, fhe faid, "She thought him properer for the army than the clergy; that it did not become a clergyman to lay violent hands on any one; that he fhould have rather prayed that fhe might be ftrengthened." Adams faid, "He was very far from being afhamed of what he had done:" fhe replied, "Want of fhame was not the currycuriftic of a clergyman." This dialogue might have probably grown warmer, had not Jofeph opportunely entered the room, to afk leave of Madam Slipflop to introduce Fanny: but fhe pofitively refufed to admit any fuch trollops, and told him, "She would have been burnt before fhe would have fuffered him to get into a chaife with her, if fhe had once refpected him of having his fluts waylaid on the road for him;" adding, "that Mr Adams acted a very pretty part, and fhe did not doubt but to fee him a bifhop." He made the beft bow he could, and cried out, "I thank you, madam, for that right-reverend appellation, which I fhall take all honeft means to deferve."-"Very honeft means," returned fhe, with a fneer, "to bring people together." At thefe words Adams took two or three ftrides acrofs the room, when the coachman came to inform Mrs Slipflop, "That the ftorm was over, and the moon fhone very bright." She then fent for Jofeph, who was fitting without with his Fanny, and would have had him gone with her; but he peremptorily refufed to leave Fanny behind, which threw the good woman into a violent rage. She faid, "She would inform her lady what doings were carrying on, and did not doubt but fhe would rid the parifh of all fuch people;" and concluded a long fpeech, full of bitternefs and very hard words, with fome reflections on the clergy not decent to repeat; at laft, finding Jofeph unmoveable, fhe flung herfelf into the chaife, cafting a look at Fanny as fhe went, not unlike that which Cleopatra gives Octavia in the play. To fay the truth, fhe was moft difagreeably difappointed by the prefence of Fanny: fhe had, from her firft feeing Jofeph at the inn, conceived hopes of fomething which might have been accomplifhed at an alehoufe as well as a palace. Indeed, it is probable Mr Adams had refcued more than Fanny from the danger of a rape that evening. When the chaife had carried off the enraged Slipflop, Adams, Jofeph, and Fanny affembled over the fire, where they had a great deal of innocent chat, pretty enough; but, as poffibly it would not be very entertaining to the reader, we fhall haften to the morning; only obferving that none of them went to bed that night. Adams, when he had fmoaked three pipes, took a comfortable nap in a great chair, and left the lovers, whofe eyes were too well employed to permit any defire of fhutting them, to enjoy by themfelves, during fome hours, an happinefs which none of my readers who have never been in love are capable of the leaft conception of, though we had as many tongues as Homer defired, to defcribe it with, and which all true lovers will reprefent to their own minds without the leaft affiftance from us. Let it fuffice then to fay, that Fanny, after a thoufand entreaties, at laft gave up her whole foul to Jofeph; and, almoft fainting in his arms, with a figh infinitely fofter and fweeter too than any Arabian breeze, fhe whifpered to his lips, which were then clofe to hers, "O Jofeph, you have won me: I will be yours for ever." Jofeph, having thanked her on his knees, and embraced her with an eagernefs which fhe now almoft returned, leapt up in a rapture, and awakened the parfon, earneftly begging him "that he would that inftant join their hands together." Adams rebuked him for his requeft, and told him "He would by no means confent to anything contrary to the forms of the Church; that he had no licence, nor indeed would he advife him to obtain one; that the Church had prefcribed a form--namely, the publication of banns--with which all good Chriftians ought to comply, and to the omiffion of which he attributed the many miferies which befell great folks in marriage;" concluding, "As many as are joined together otherwife than G--'s word doth allow are not joined together by G--, neither is their matrimony lawful." Fanny agreed with the parfon, faying to Jofeph, with a blufh, "She affured him fhe would not confent to any fuch thing, and that fhe wondered at his offering it." In which refolution fhe was comforted and commended by Adams; and Jofeph was obliged to wait patiently till after the third publication of the banns, which, however, he obtained the confent of Fanny, in the prefence of Adams, to put in at their arrival. The fun had been now rifen fome hours, when Jofeph, finding his leg furprizingly recovered, propofed to walk forwards; but when they were all ready to fet out, an accident a little retarded them. This was no other than the reckoning, which amounted to feven fhillings; no great fum if we confider the immenfe quantity of ale which Mr Adams poured in. Indeed, they had no objection to the reafonablenefs of the bill, but many to the probability of paying it; for the fellow who had taken poor Fanny's purfe had unluckily forgot to return it. So that the account ftood thus:--  S D Mr Adams and company, Dr. 0 7 0 In Mr Adams's pocket 0 0 6 1/2 In Mr Jofeph's 0 0 0 In Mrs Fanny's 0 0 0 Balance 0 6 5 1/2 They ftood filent fome few minutes, ftaring at each other, when Adams whipt out on his toes, and afked the hoftefs, "If there was no clergyman in that parifh?" She anfwered, "There was."--"Is he wealthy?" replied he; to which fhe likewife anfwered in the affirmative. Adams then fnapping his fingers returned overjoyed to his companions, crying out, "Heureka, Heureka;" which not being underftood, he told them in plain Englifh, "They need give themfelves no trouble, for he had a brother in the parifh who would defray the reckoning, and that he would juft ftep to his houfe and fetch the money, and return to them inftantly." END OF VOL. I