THE WORKS OF HENRY FIELDING EDITED BY GEORGE SAINTSBURY IN TWELVE VOLUMES VOL. II. JOSEPH ANDREWS VOL. II. CONTENTS BOOK II.--continued. CHAPTER XIV. _An interview between parfon Adams and parfon Trulliber._ CHAPTER XV. _An adventure, the confequence of a new inftance which parfon Adams gave of his forgetfulnefs._ CHAPTER XVI. _A very curious adventure, in which Mr Adams gave a much greater inftance of the honeft fimplicity of his heart, than of his experience in the ways of this world._ CHAPTER XVII. _A dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and his hoft, which, by the difagreement in their opinions, feemed to threaten an unlucky cataftrophe, had it not been timely prevented by the return of the lovers._ BOOK III. CHAPTER I. _Matter prefatory in praife of biography._ CHAPTER II. _A night fcene, wherein feveral wonderful adventures befel Adams and his fellow-travellers._ CHAPTER III. _In which the gentleman relates the hiftory of his life._ CHAPTER IV. _A defcription of Mr Wilfon's way of living. The tragical adventure of the dog, and other grave matters._ CHAPTER V. _A difputation on fchools held on the road between Mr Abraham Adams and Jofeph; and a difcovery not unwelcome to them both._ CHAPTER VI. _Moral reflections by Jofeph Andrews; with the hunting adventure, and parfon Adams's miraculous efcape._ CHAPTER VII. _A fcene of roafting, very nicely adapted to the prefent tafte and times._ CHAPTER VIII. _Which fome readers will think too fhort and others too long._ CHAPTER IX. _Containing as furprizing and bloody adventures as can be found in this or perhaps any other authentic hiftory._ CHAPTER X. _A difcourfe between the poet and the player; of no other ufe in this hiftory but to divert the reader._ CHAPTER XI. _Containing the exhortations of parfon Adams to his friend in affliction; calculated for the inftruction and improvement of the reader._ CHAPTER XII. _More adventures, which we hope will as much pleafe as furprize the reader._ CHAPTER XIII. _A curious dialogue which paffed between Mr Abraham Adams and Mr Peter Pounce, better worth reading than all the works of Colley Cibber and many others._ BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. _The arrival of Lady Booby and the reft at Booby-hall._ CHAPTER II. _A dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and the Lady Booby._ CHAPTER III. _What paffed between the lady and lawyer Scout._ CHAPTER IV. _A fhort chapter, but very full of matter; particularly the arrival of Mr Booby and his lady._ CHAPTER V. _Containing juftice bufinefs; curious precedents of depofitions, and other matters neceffary to be perufed by all juftices of the peace and their clerks._ CHAPTER VI. _Of which you are defired to read no more than you like._ CHAPTER VII. _Philofophical reflections, the like not to be found in any light French romance. Mr Booby's grave advice to Jofeph, and Fanny's encounter with a beau._ CHAPTER VIII. _A difcourfe which happened between Mr Adams, Mrs Adams, Jofeph, and Fanny, with fome behaviour of Mr Adams which will be called by fome few readers very low, abfurd, and unnatural._ CHAPTER IX _A vifit which the polite Lady Booby and her polite friend paid to the parfon._ CHAPTER X. _The hiftory of two friends, which may afford an ufeful leffon to all thofe perfons who happen to take up their refidence in married families._ CHAPTER XI. _In which the hiftory is continued._ CHAPTER XII. _Where the good-natured reader will fee fomething which will give him no great pleafure._ CHAPTER XIII _The hiftory, returning to the Lady Booby, gives fome account of the terrible conflict in her breaft between love and pride, with what happened on the prefent difcovery._ CHAPTER XIV. _Containing feveral curious night-adventures, in which Mr Adams fell into many hair-breadth fcapes, partly owing to his goodnefs, and partly to his inadvertency._ CHAPTER XV. _The arrival of Gaffar and Gammar Andrews with another perfon not much expected, and a perfect folution of the difficulties raifed by the pedlar._ CHAPTER XVI. _Being the laft. In which this true hiftory is brought to a happy conclufion._ LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. MR WILSON RELATES HIS HISTORY PARSON ADAMS HE RAN TOWARDS HER BOOK II.--continued. CHAPTER XIV. _An interview between parfon Adams and parfon Trulliber._ Parfon Adams came to the houfe of parfon Trulliber, whom he found ftript into his waiftcoat, with an apron on, and a pail in his hand, juft come from ferving his hogs; for Mr Trulliber was a parfon on Sundays, but all the other fix might more properly be called a farmer. He occupied a fmall piece of land of his own, befides which he rented a confiderable deal more. His wife milked his cows, managed his dairy, and followed the markets with butter and eggs. The hogs fell chiefly to his care, which he carefully waited on at home, and attended to fairs; on which occafion he was liable to many jokes, his own fize being, with much ale, rendered little inferior to that of the beafts he fold. He was indeed one of the largeft men you fhould fee, and could have acted the part of Sir John Falftaff without ftuffing. Add to this that the rotundity of his belly was confiderably increafed by the fhortnefs of his ftature, his fhadow afcending very near as far in height, when he lay on his back, as when he ftood on his legs. His voice was loud and hoarfe, and his accents extremely broad. To complete the whole, he had a ftatelinefs in his gait, when he walked, not unlike that of a goofe, only he ftalked flower. Mr Trulliber, being informed that fomebody wanted to fpeak with him, immediately flipt off his apron and clothed himfelf in an old night-gown, being the drefs in which he always faw his company at home. His wife, who informed him of Mr Adams's arrival, had made a fmall miftake; for fhe had told her hufband, "She believed there was a man come for fome of his hogs." This fuppofition made Mr Trulliber haften with the utmoft expedition to attend his gueft. He no fooner faw Adams than, not in the leaft doubting the caufe of his errand to be what his wife had imagined, he told him, "He was come in very good time; that he expected a dealer that very afternoon;" and added, "they were all pure and fat, and upwards of twenty fcore a-piece." Adams anfwered, "He believed he did not know him." "Yes, yes," cried Trulliber, "I have feen you often at fair; why, we have dealt before now, mun, I warrant you. Yes, yes," cries he, "I remember thy face very well, but won't mention a word more till you have feen them, though I have never fold thee a flitch of fuch bacon as is now in the ftye." Upon which he laid violent hands on Adams, and dragged him into the hog-ftye, which was indeed but two fteps from his parlour window. They were no fooner arrived there than he cry'd out, "Do but handle them! ftep in, friend! art welcome to handle them, whether doft buy or no." At which words, opening the gate, he pufhed Adams into the pig-ftye, infifting on it that he fhould handle them before he would talk one word with him. Adams, whofe natural complacence was beyond any artificial, was obliged to comply before he was fuffered to explain himfelf; and, laying hold on one of their tails, the unruly beaft gave fuch a fudden fpring, that he threw poor Adams all along in the mire. Trulliber, inftead of affifting him to get up, burft into a laughter, and, entering the ftye, faid to Adams, with fome contempt, "Why, doft not know how to handle a hog?" and was going to lay hold of one himfelf, but Adams, who thought he had carried his complacence far enough, was no fooner on his legs than he efcaped out of the reach of the animals, and cried out, "_Nihil habeo cum porcis_: I am a clergyman, fir, and am not come to buy hogs." Trulliber anfwered, "He was forry for the miftake, but that he muft blame his wife," adding, "fhe was a fool, and always committed blunders." He then defired him to walk in and clean himfelf, that he would only faften up the ftye and follow him. Adams defired leave to dry his greatcoat, wig, and hat by the fire, which Trulliber granted. Mrs Trulliber would have brought him a bafin of water to wafh his face, but her hufband bid her be quiet like a fool as fhe was, or fhe would commit more blunders, and then directed Adams to the pump. While Adams was thus employed, Trulliber, conceiving no great refpect for the appearance of his gueft, faftened the parlour door, and now conducted him into the kitchen, telling him he believed a cup of drink would do him no harm, and whifpered his wife to draw a little of the worft ale. After a fhort filence Adams faid, "I fancy, fir, you already perceive me to be a clergyman."--"Ay, ay," cries Trulliber, grinning, "I perceive you have fome caffock; I will not venture to caale it a whole one." Adams anfwered, "It was indeed none of the beft, but he had the miffortune to tear it about ten years ago in paffing over a ftile." Mrs Trulliber, returning with the drink, told her hufband, "She fancied the gentleman was a traveller, and that he would be glad to eat a bit." Trulliber bid her hold her impertinent tongue, and afked her, "If parfons ufed to travel without horfes?" adding, "he fuppofed the gentleman had none by his having no boots on."--"Yes, fir, yes," fays Adams; "I have a horfe, but I have left him behind me."--"I am glad to hear you have one," fays Trulliber; "for I affure you I don't love to fee clergymen on foot; it is not feemly nor fuiting the dignity of the cloth." Here Trulliber made a long oration on the dignity of the cloth (or rather gown) not much worth relating, till his wife had fpread the table and fet a mefs of porridge on it for his breakfaft. He then faid to Adams, "I don't know, friend, how you came to caale on me; however, as you are here, if you think proper to eat a morfel, you may." Adams accepted the invitation, and the two parfons fat down together; Mrs Trulliber waiting behind her hufband's chair, as was, it feems, her cuftom. Trulliber eat heartily, but fcarce put anything in his mouth without finding fault with his wife's cookery. All which the poor woman bore patiently. Indeed, fhe was fo abfolute an admirer of her hufband's greatnefs and importance, of which fhe had frequent hints from his own mouth, that fhe almoft carried her adoration to an opinion of his infallibility. To fay the truth, the parfon had exercifed her more ways than one; and the pious woman had fo well edified by her hufband's fermons, that fhe had refolved to receive the bad things of this world together with the good. She had indeed been at firft a little contentious; but he had long fince got the better; partly by her love for this, partly by her fear of that, partly by her religion, partly by the refpect he paid himfelf, and partly by that which he received from the parifh. She had, in fhort, abfolutely fubmitted, and now worfhipped her hufband, as Sarah did Abraham, calling him (not lord, but) mafter. Whilft they were at table her hufband gave her a frefh example of his greatnefs; for, as fhe had juft delivered a cup of ale to Adams, he fnatched it out of his hand, and, crying out, "I caal'd vurft," fwallowed down the ale. Adams denied it; it was referred to the wife, who, though her confcience was on the fide of Adams, durft not give it againft her hufband; upon which he faid, "No, fir, no; I fhould not have been fo rude to have taken it from you if you had caal'd vurft, but I'd have you know I'm a better man than to fuffer the beft he in the kingdom to drink before me in my own houfe when I caale vurft." As foon as their breakfaft was ended, Adams began in the following manner: "I think, fir, it is high time to inform you of the bufinefs of my embaffy. I am a traveller, and am paffing this way in company with two young people, a lad and a damfel, my parifhioners, towards my own cure; we ftopt at a houfe of hofpitality in the parifh, where they directed me to you as having the cure."--"Though I am but a curate," fays Trulliber, "I believe I am as warm as the vicar himfelf, or perhaps the rector of the next parifh too; I believe I could buy them both."--"Sir," cries Adams, "I rejoice thereat. Now, fir, my bufinefs is, that we are by various accidents ftript of our money, and are not able to pay our reckoning, being feven fhillings. I therefore requeft you to affift me with the loan of thofe feven fhillings, and alfo feven fhillings more, which, peradventure, I fhall return to you; but if not, I am convinced you will joyfully embrace fuch an opportunity of laying up a treafure in a better place than any this world affords." Suppofe a ftranger, who entered the chambers of a lawyer, being imagined a client, when the lawyer was preparing his palm for the fee, fhould pull out a writ againft him. Suppofe an apothecary, at the door of a chariot containing fome great doctor of eminent fkill, fhould, inftead of directions to a patient, prefent him with a potion for himfelf. Suppofe a minifter fhould, inftead of a good round fum, treat my lord ----, or fir ----, or efq. ---- with a good broomftick. Suppofe a civil companion, or a led captain, fhould, inftead of virtue, and honour, and beauty, and parts, and admiration, thunder vice, and infamy, and uglinefs, and folly, and contempt, in his patron's ears. Suppofe, when a tradefman firft carries in his bill, the man of fafhion fhould pay it; or fuppofe, if he did fo, the tradefman fhould abate what he had overcharged, on the fuppofition of waiting. In fhort--fuppofe what you will, you never can nor will fuppofe anything equal to the aftonifhment which feized on Trulliber, as foon as Adams had ended his fpeech. A while he rolled his eyes in filence; fometimes furveying Adams, then his wife; then cafting them on the ground, then lifting them up to heaven. At laft he burft forth in the following accents: "Sir, I believe I know where to lay up my little treafure as well as another. I thank G--, if I am not fo warm as fome, I am content; that is a bleffing greater than riches; and he to whom that is given need afk no more. To be content with a little is greater than to poffefs the world; which a man may poffefs without being fo. Lay up my treafure! what matters where a man's treafure is whofe heart is in the Scriptures? there is the treafure of a Chriftian." At thefe words the water ran from Adams's eyes; and, catching Trulliber by the hand in a rapture, "Brother," fays he, "heavens blefs the accident by which I came to fee you! I would have walked many a mile to have communed with you; and, believe me, I will fhortly pay you a fecond vifit; but my friends, I fancy, by this time, wonder at my ftay; fo let me have the money immediately." Trulliber then put on a ftern look, and cried out, "Thou doft not intend to rob me?" At which the wife, burfting into tears, fell on her knees and roared out, "O dear fir! for Heaven's fake don't rob my mafter; we are but poor people." "Get up, for a fool as thou art, and go about thy bufinefs," faid Trulliber; "doft think the man will venture his life? he is a beggar, and no robber." "Very true, indeed," anfwered Adams. "I wifh, with all my heart, the tithing-man was here," cries Trulliber; "I would have thee punifhed as a vagabond for thy impudence. Fourteen fhillings indeed! I won't give thee a farthing. I believe thou art no more a clergyman than the woman there" (pointing to his wife); "but if thou art, doft deferve to have thy gown ftript over thy fhoulders for running about the country in fuch a manner." "I forgive your fufpicions," fays Adams; "but fuppofe I am not a clergyman, I am neverthelefs thy brother; and thou, as a Chriftian, much more as a clergyman, art obliged to relieve my diftrefs." "Doft preach to me?" replied Trulliber; "doft pretend to inftruct me in my duty?" "Ifacks, a good ftory," cries Mrs Trulliber, "to preach to my mafter." "Silence, woman," cries Trulliber. "I would have thee know, friend" (addreffing himfelf to Adams), "I fhall not learn my duty from fuch as thee. I know what charity is, better than to give to vagabonds." "Befides, if we were inclined, the poor's rate obliges us to give fo much charity," cries the wife. "Pugh! thou art a fool. Poor's reate! Hold thy nonfenfe," anfwered Trulliber; and then, turning to Adams, he told him, "he would give him nothing." "I am forry," anfwered Adams, "that you do know what charity is, fince you practife it no better: I muft tell you, if you truft to your knowledge for your juftification, you will find yourfelf deceived, though you fhould add faith to it, without good works." "Fellow," cries Trulliber, "doft thou fpeak againft faith in my houfe? Get out of my doors: I will no longer remain under the fame roof with a wretch who fpeaks wantonly of faith and the Scriptures." "Name not the Scriptures," fays Adams. "How! not name the Scriptures! Do you difbelieve the Scriptures?" cries Trulliber. "No; but you do," anfwered Adams, "if I may reafon from your practice; for their commands are fo explicit, and their rewards and punifhments fo immenfe, that it is impoffible a man fhould ftedfaftly believe without obeying. Now, there is no command more exprefs, no duty more frequently enjoined, than charity. Whoever, therefore, is void of charity, I make no fcruple of pronouncing that he is no Chriftian." "I would not advife thee," fays Trulliber, "to fay that I am no Chriftian: I won't take it of you; for I believe I am as good a man as thyfelf" (and indeed, though he was now rather too corpulent for athletic exercifes, he had, in his youth, been one of the beft boxers and cudgel-players in the county). His wife, feeing him clench his fift, interpofed, and begged him not to fight, but fhow himfelf a true Chriftian, and take the law of him. As nothing could provoke Adams to ftrike, but an abfolute affault on himfelf or his friend, he fmiled at the angry look and geftures of Trulliber; and, telling him he was forry to fee fuch men in orders, departed without further ceremony. CHAPTER XV. _An adventure, the confequence of a new inftance which parfon Adams gave of his forgetfulnefs._ When he came back to the inn he found Jofeph and Fanny fitting together. They were fo far from thinking his abfence long, as he had feared they would, that they never once miffed or thought of him. Indeed, I have been often affured by both, that they fpent thefe hours in a moft delightful converfation; but, as I never could prevail on either to relate it, fo I cannot communicate it to the reader. Adams acquainted the lovers with the ill fuccefs of his enterprize. They were all greatly confounded, none being able to propofe any method of departing, till Jofeph at laft advifed calling in the hoftefs, and defiring her to truft them; which Fanny faid fhe defpaired of her doing, as fhe was one of the foureft-faced women fhe had ever beheld. But fhe was agreeably difappointed; for the hoftefs was no fooner afked the queftion than fhe readily agreed; and, with a curtfy and fmile, wifhed them a good journey. However, left Fanny's fkill in phyfiognomy fhould be called in queftion, we will venture to affign one reafon which might probably incline her to this confidence and good-humour. When Adams faid he was going to vifit his brother, he had unwittingly impofed on Jofeph and Fanny, who both believed he had meant his natural brother, and not his brother in divinity, and had fo informed the hoftefs, on her enquiry after him. Now Mr Trulliber had, by his profeffions of piety, by his gravity, aufterity, referve, and the opinion of his great wealth, fo great an authority in his parifh, that they all lived in the utmoft fear and apprehenfion of him. It was therefore no wonder that the hoftefs, who knew it was in his option whether fhe fhould ever fell another mug of drink, did not dare to affront his fuppofed brother by denying him credit. They were now juft on their departure when Adams recollected he had left his greatcoat and hat at Mr Trulliber's. As he was not defirous of renewing his vifit, the hoftefs herfelf, having no fervant at home, offered to fetch it. This was an unfortunate expedient; for the hoftefs was foon undeceived in the opinion fhe had entertained of Adams, whom Trulliber abufed in the groffeft terms, efpecially when he heard he had had the affurance to pretend to be his near relation. At her return, therefore, fhe entirely changed her note. She faid, "Folks might be afhamed of travelling about, and pretending to be what they were not. That taxes were high, and for her part fhe was obliged to pay for what fhe had; fhe could not therefore poffibly, nor would fhe, truft anybody; no, not her own father. That money was never fcarcer, and fhe wanted to make up a fum. That fhe expected, therefore, they fhould pay their reckoning before they left the houfe." Adams was now greatly perplexed; but, as he knew that he could eafily have borrowed fuch a fum in his own parifh, and as he knew he would have lent it himfelf to any mortal in diftrefs, fo he took frefh courage, and fallied out all round the parifh, but to no purpofe; he returned as pennylefs as he went, groaning and lamenting that it was poffible, in a country profeffing Chriftianity, for a wretch to ftarve in the midft of his fellow-creatures who abounded. Whilft he was gone, the hoftefs, who ftayed as a fort of guard with Jofeph and Fanny, entertained them with the goodnefs of parfon Trulliber. And, indeed, he had not only a very good character as to other qualities in the neighbourhood, but was reputed a man of great charity; for, though he never gave a farthing, he had always that word in his mouth. Adams was no fooner returned the fecond time than the ftorm grew exceedingly high, the hoftefs declaring, among other things, that, if they offered to ftir without paying her, fhe would foon overtake them with a warrant. Plato and Ariftotle, or fomebody elfe, hath faid, _that when the moft exquifite cunning fails, chance often hits the mark, and that by means the leaft expected_. Virgil expreffes this very boldly:-- _Turne, quod optanti divum promittere nemo Auderet, volvenda dies, en! attulit ultro._ I would quote more great men if I could; but my memory not permitting me, I will proceed to exemplify thefe obfervations by the following inftance:-- There chanced (for Adams had not cunning enough to contrive it) to be at that time in the alehoufe a fellow who had been formerly a drummer in an Irifh regiment, and now travelled the country as a pedlar. This man, having attentively liftened to the difcourfe of the hoftefs, at laft took Adams afide, and afked him what the fum was for which they were detained. As foon as he was informed, he fighed, and faid, "He was forry it was fo much; for that he had no more than fix fhillings and fixpence in his pocket, which he would lend them with all his heart." Adams gave a caper, and cry'd out, "It would do; for that he had fixpence himfelf." And thus thefe poor people, who could not engage the compaffion of riches and piety, were at length delivered out of their diftrefs by the charity of a poor pedlar. I fhall refer it to my reader to make what obfervations he pleafes on this incident: it is fufficient for me to inform him that, after Adams and his companions had returned him a thoufand thanks, and told him where he might call to be repaid, they all fallied out of the houfe without any compliments from their hoftefs, or indeed without paying her any; Adams declaring he would take particular care never to call there again; and fhe on her fide affuring them fhe wanted no fuch guefts. CHAPTER XVI. _A very curious adventure, in which Mr Adams gave a much greater inftance of the honeft fimplicity of his heart, than of his experience in the ways of this world._ Our travellers had walked about two miles from that inn, which they had more reafon to have miftaken for a caftle than Don Quixote ever had any of thofe in which he fojourned, feeing they had met with fuch difficulty in efcaping out of its walls, when they came to a parifh, and beheld a fign of invitation hanging out. A gentleman fat fmoaking a pipe at the door, of whom Adams inquired the road, and received fo courteous and obliging an anfwer, accompanied with fo fmiling a countenance, that the good parfon, whofe heart was naturally difpofed to love and affection, began to afk feveral other queftions; particularly the name of the parifh, and who was the owner of a large houfe whofe front they then had in profpect. The gentleman anfwered as obligingly as before; and as to the houfe, acquainted him it was his own. He then proceeded in the following manner: "Sir, I prefume by your habit you are a clergyman; and as you are travelling on foot I fuppofe a glafs of good beer will not be difagreeable to you; and I can recommend my landlord's within as fome of the beft in all this country. What fay you, will you halt a little and let us take a pipe together? there is no better tobacco in the kingdom." This propofal was not difpleafing to Adams, who had allayed his thirft that day with no better liquor than what Mrs Trulliber's cellar had produced; and which was indeed little fuperior, either in richnefs or flavour, to that which diftilled from thofe grains her generous hufband beftowed on his hogs. Having, therefore, abundantly thanked the gentleman for his kind invitation, and bid Jofeph and Fanny follow him, he entered the alehoufe, where a large loaf and cheefe and a pitcher of beer, which truly anfwered the character given of it, being fet before them, the three travellers fell to eating, with appetites infinitely more voracious than are to be found at the moft exquifite eating-houfes in the parifh of St. James's. The gentleman expreffed great delight in the hearty and cheerful behaviour of Adams; and particularly in the familiarity with which he converfed with Jofeph and Fanny, whom he often called his children; a term he explained to mean no more than his parifhioners; faying, "He looked on all thofe whom God had intrufted to his care to ftand to him in that relation." The gentleman, fhaking him by the hand, highly applauded thofe fentiments. "They are, indeed," fays he, "the true principles of a Chriftian divine; and I heartily wifh they were univerfal; but, on the contrary, I am forry to fay the parfon of our parifh, inftead of efteeming his poor parifhioners as a part of his family, feems rather to confider them as not of the fame fpecies with himfelf. He feldom fpeaks to any, unlefs fome few of the richeft of us; nay, indeed, he will not move his hat to the others. I often laugh when I behold him on Sundays ftrutting along the churchyard like a turkey-cock through rows of his parifhioners, who bow to him with as much fubmiffion, and are as unregarded, as a fet of fervile courtiers by the proudeft prince in Chriftendom. But if fuch temporal pride is ridiculous, furely the fpiritual is odious and deteftable; if fuch a puffed--up empty human bladder, ftrutting in princely robes, juftly moves one's derifion, furely in the habit of a prieft it muft raife our fcorn." "Doubtlefs," anfwered Adams, "your opinion is right; but I hope fuch examples are rare. The clergy whom I have the honour to know maintain a different behaviour; and you will allow me, fir, that the readinefs which too many of the laity fhow to contemn the order may be one reafon of their avoiding too much humility." "Very true, indeed," fays the gentleman; "I find, fir, you are a man of excellent fenfe, and am happy in this opportunity of knowing you; perhaps our accidental meeting may not be difadvantageous to you neither. At prefent I fhall only fay to you that the incumbent of this living is old and infirm, and that it is in my gift. Doctor, give me your hand; and affure yourfelf of it at his deceafe." Adams told him, "He was never more confounded in his life than at his utter incapacity to make any return to fuch noble and unmerited generofity." "A mere trifle, fir," cries the gentleman, "fcarce worth your acceptance; a little more than three hundred a year. I wifh it was double the value for your fake." Adams bowed, and cried from the emotions of his gratitude; when the other afked him, "If he was married, or had any children, befides thofe in the fpiritual fenfe he had mentioned." "Sir," replied the parfon, "I have a wife and fix at your fervice." "That is unlucky," fays the gentleman; "for I would otherwife have taken you into my own houfe as my chaplain; however, I have another in the parifh (for the parfonage-houfe is not good enough), which I will furnifh for you. Pray, does your wife underftand a dairy?" "I can't profefs fhe does," fays Adams. "I am forry for it," quoth the gentleman; "I would have given you half-a-dozen cows, and very good grounds to have maintained them." "Sir," faid Adams, in an ecftafy, "you are too liberal; indeed you are." "Not at all," cries the gentleman: "I efteem riches only as they give me an opportunity of doing good; and I never faw one whom I had a greater inclination to ferve." At which words he fhook him heartily by the hand, and told him he had fufficient room in his houfe to entertain him and his friends. Adams begged he might give him no fuch trouble; that they could be very well accommodated in the houfe where they were; forgetting they had not a fixpenny piece among them. The gentleman would not be denied; and, informing himfelf how far they were travelling, he faid it was too long a journey to take on foot, and begged that they would favour him by fuffering him to lend them a fervant and horfes; adding, withal, that, if they would do him the pleafure of their company only two days, he would furnifh them with his coach and fix. Adams, turning to Jofeph, faid, "How lucky is this gentleman's goodnefs to you, who I am afraid would be fcarce able to hold out on your lame leg!" and then, addreffing the perfon who made him thefe liberal promifes, after much bowing, he cried out, "Bleffed be the hour which firft introduced me to a man of your charity! you are indeed a Chriftian of the true primitive kind, and an honour to the country wherein you live. I would willingly have taken a pilgrimage to the Holy Land to have beheld you; for the advantages which we draw from your goodnefs give me little pleafure, in comparifon of what I enjoy for your own fake when I confider the treafures you are by thefe means laying up for yourfelf in a country that paffeth not away. We will therefore, moft generous fir, accept your goodnefs, as well the entertainment you have fo kindly offered us at your houfe this evening, as the accommodation of your horfes to-morrow morning." He then began to fearch for his hat, as did Jofeph for his; and both they and Fanny were in order of departure, when the gentleman, ftopping fhort, and feeming to meditate by himfelf for the fpace of about a minute, exclaimed thus: "Sure never anything was fo unlucky; I had forgot that my houfe-keeper was gone abroad, and hath locked up all my rooms; indeed, I would break them open for you, but fhall not be able to furnifh you with a bed; for fhe has likewife put away all my linen. I am glad it entered into my head before I had given you the trouble of walking there; befides, I believe you will find better accommodations here than you expected.--Landlord, you can provide good beds for thefe people, can't you?" "Yes, and pleafe your worfhip," cries the hoft, "and fuch as no lord or juftice of the peace in the kingdom need be afhamed to lie in." "I am heartily forry," fays the gentleman, "for this difappointment. I am refolved I will never fuffer her to carry away the keys again." "Pray, fir, let it not make you uneafy," cries Adams; "we fhall do very well here; and the loan of your horfes is a favour we fhall be incapable of making any return to." "Ay!" faid the fquire, "the horfes fhall attend you here at what hour in the morning you pleafe;" and now, after many civilities too tedious to enumerate, many fqueezes by the hand, with moft affectionate looks and fmiles at each other, and after appointing the horfes at feven the next morning, the gentleman took his leave of them, and departed to his own houfe. Adams and his companions returned to the table, where the parfon fmoaked another pipe, and then they all retired to reft. Mr Adams rofe very early, and called Jofeph out of his bed, between whom a very fierce difpute enfued, whether Fanny fhould ride behind Jofeph, or behind the gentleman's fervant; Jofeph infifting on it that he was perfectly recovered, and was as capable of taking care of Fanny as any other perfon could be. But Adams would not agree to it, and declared he would not truft her behind him; for that he was weaker than he imagined himfelf to be. This difpute continued a long time, and had begun to be very hot, when a fervant arrived from their good friend, to acquaint them that he was unfortunately prevented from lending them any horfes; for that his groom had, unknown to him, put his whole ftable under a courfe of phyfic. This advice prefently ftruck the two difputants dumb: Adams cried out, "Was ever anything fo unlucky as this poor gentleman? I proteft I am more forry on his account than my own. You fee, Jofeph, how this good-natured man is treated by his fervants; one locks up his linen, another phyfics his horfes, and I fuppofe, by his being at this houfe laft night, the butler had locked up his cellar. Blefs us! how good-nature is ufed in this world! I proteft I am more concerned on his account than my own." "So am not I," cries Jofeph; "not that I am much troubled about walking on foot; all my concern is, how we fhall get out of the houfe, unlefs God fends another pedlar to redeem us. But certainly this gentleman has fuch an affection for you, that he would lend you a larger fum than we owe here, which is not above four or five fhillings." "Very true, child," anfwered Adams; "I will write a letter to him, and will even venture to folicit him for three half-crowns; there will be no harm in having two or three fhillings in our pockets; as we have full forty miles to travel, we may poffibly have occafion for them." Fanny being now rifen, Jofeph paid her a vifit, and left Adams to write his letter, which having finifhed, he defpatched a boy with it to the gentleman, and then feated himfelf by the door, lighted his pipe, and betook himfelf to meditation. The boy ftaying longer than feemed to be neceffary, Jofeph, who with Fanny was now returned to the parfon, expreffed fome apprehenfions that the gentleman's fteward had locked up his purfe too. To which Adams anfwered, "It might very poffibly be, and he fhould wonder at no liberties which the devil might put into the head of a wicked fervant to take with fo worthy a mafter;" but added, "that, as the fum was fo fmall, fo noble a gentleman would be eafily able to procure it in the parifh, though he had it not in his own pocket. Indeed," fays he, "if it was four or five guineas, or any fuch large quantity of money, it might be a different matter." They were now fat down to breakfaft over fome toaft and ale, when the boy returned and informed them that the gentleman was not at home. "Very well!" cries Adams; "but why, child, did you not ftay till his return? Go back again, my good boy, and wait for his coming home; he cannot be gone far, as his horfes are all fick; and befides, he had no intention to go abroad, for he invited us to fpend this day and tomorrow at his houfe. Therefore go back, child, and tarry till his return home." The meffenger departed, and was back again with great expedition, bringing an account that the gentleman was gone a long journey, and would not be at home again this month. At thefe words Adams feemed greatly confounded, faying, "This muft be a fudden accident, as the ficknefs or death of a relation or fome fuch unforefeen miffortune;" and then, turning to Jofeph, cried, "I wifh you had reminded me to have borrowed this money laft night." Jofeph, fmiling, anfwered, "He was very much deceived if the gentleman would not have found fome excufe to avoid lending it.--I own," fays he, "I was never much pleafed with his profeffing fo much kindnefs for you at firft fight; for I have heard the gentlemen of our cloth in London tell many fuch ftories of their mafters. But when the boy brought the meffage back of his not being at home, I prefently knew what would follow; for, whenever a man of fafhion doth not care to fulfil his promifes, the cuftom is to order his fervants that he will never be at home to the perfon fo promifed. In London they call it denying him. I have myfelf denied Sir Thomas Booby above a hundred times, and when the man hath danced attendance for about a month or fometimes longer, he is acquainted in the end that the gentleman is gone out of town and could do nothing in the bufinefs."--"Good Lord!" fays Adams, "what wickednefs is there in the Chriftian world! I profefs almoft equal to what I have read of the heathens. But furely, Jofeph, your fufpicions of this gentleman muft be unjuft, for what a filly fellow muft he be who would do the devil's work for nothing! and canft thou tell me any intereft he could poffibly propofe to himfelf by deceiving us in his profeffions?"--"It is not for me," anfwered Jofeph, "to give reafons for what men do, to a gentleman of your learning."--"You fay right," quoth Adams; "knowledge of men is only to be learned from books; Plato and Seneca for that; and thofe are authors, I am afraid, child, you never read."--"Not I, fir, truly," anfwered Jofeph; "all I know is, it is a maxim among the gentlemen of our cloth, that thofe mafters who promife the moft perform the leaft; and I have often heard them fay they have found the largeft vails in thofe families where they were not promifed any. But, fir, inftead of confidering any farther thefe matters, it would be our wifeft way to contrive fome method of getting out of this houfe; for the generous gentleman, inftead of doing us any fervice, hath left us the whole reckoning to pay." Adams was going to anfwer, when their hoft came in, and, with a kind of jeering fmile, faid, "Well, mafters! the fquire hath not fent his horfes for you yet. Laud help me! how eafily fome folks make promifes!"--"How!" fays Adams; "have you ever known him do anything of this kind before?"--"Ay! marry have I," anfwered the hoft: "it is no bufinefs of mine, you know, fir, to fay anything to a gentleman to his face; but now he is not here, I will affure you, he hath not his fellow within the three next market-towns. I own I could not help laughing when I heard him offer you the living, for thereby hangs a good jeft. I thought he would have offered you my houfe next, for one is no more his to difpofe of than the other." At thefe words Adams, bleffing himfelf, declared, "He had never read of fuch a monfter. But what vexes me moft," fays he, "is, that he hath decoyed us into running up a long debt with you, which we are not able to pay, for we have no money about us, and, what is worfe, live at fuch a diftance, that if you fhould truft us, I am afraid you would lofe your money for want of our finding any conveniency of fending it."--"Truft you, mafter!" fays the hoft, "that I will with all my heart. I honour the clergy too much to deny trufting one of them for fuch a trifle; befides, I like your fear of never paying me. I have loft many a debt in my lifetime, but was promifed to be paid them all in a very fhort time. I will fcore this reckoning for the novelty of it. It is the firft, I do affure you, of its kind. But what fay you, mafter, fhall we have t'other pot before we part? It will wafte but a little chalk more, and if you never pay me a fhilling the lofs will not ruin me." Adams liked the invitation very well, efpecially as it was delivered with fo hearty an accent. He fhook his hoft by the hand, and thanking him, faid, "He would tarry another pot rather for the pleafure of fuch worthy company than for the liquor;" adding, "he was glad to find fome Chriftians left in the kingdom, for that he almoft began to fufpect that he was fojourning in a country inhabited only by Jews and Turks." The kind hoft produced the liquor, and Jofeph with Fanny retired into the garden, where, while they folaced themfelves with amorous difcourfe, Adams fat down with his hoft; and, both filling their glaffes, and lighting their pipes, they began that dialogue which the reader will find in the next chapter. CHAPTER XVII. _A dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and his hoft, which, by the difagreement in their opinions, feemed to threaten an unlucky cataftrophe, had it not been timely prevented by the return of the lovers._ "Sir," faid the hoft, "I affure you you are not the firft to whom our fquire hath promifed more than he hath performed. He is fo famous for this practice, that his word will not be taken for much by thofe who know him. I remember a young fellow whom he promifed his parents to make an excifeman. The poor people, who could ill afford it, bred their fon to writing and accounts, and other learning to qualify him for the place; and the boy held up his head above his condition with thefe hopes; nor would he go to plough, nor to any other kind of work, and went conftantly dreft as fine as could be, with two clean Holland fhirts a week, and this for feveral years; till at laft he followed the fquire up to London, thinking there to mind him of his promifes; but he could never get fight of him. So that, being out of money and bufinefs, he fell into evil company and wicked courfes; and in the end came to a fentence of tranfportation, the news of which broke the mother's heart.--I will tell you another true ftory of him. There was a neighbour of mine, a farmer, who had two fons whom he bred up to the bufinefs. Pretty lads they were. Nothing would ferve the fquire but that the youngeft muft be made a parfon. Upon which he perfuaded the father to fend him to fchool, promifing that he would afterwards maintain him at the univerfity, and, when he was of a proper age, give him a living. But after the lad had been feven years at fchool, and his father brought him to the fquire, with a letter from his mafter that he was fit for the univerfity, the fquire, inftead of minding his promife, or fending him thither at his expenfe, only told his father that the young man was a fine fcholar, and it was pity he could not afford to keep him at Oxford for four or five years more, by which time, if he could get him a curacy, he might have him ordained. The farmer faid, 'He was not a man fufficient to do any fuch thing.'--'Why, then,' anfwered the fquire, 'I am very forry you have given him fo much learning; for, if he cannot get his living by that, it will rather fpoil him for anything elfe; and your other fon, who can hardly write his name, will do more at ploughing and fowing, and is in a better condition, than he.' And indeed fo it proved; for the poor lad, not finding friends to maintain him in his learning, as he had expected, and being unwilling to work, fell to drinking, though he was a very fober lad before; and in a fhort time, partly with grief, and partly with good liquor, fell into a confumption, and died.--Nay, I can tell you more ftill: there was another, a young woman, and the handfomeft in all this neighbourhood, whom he enticed up to London, promifing to make her a gentlewoman to one of your women of quality; but, inftead of keeping his word, we have fince heard, after having a child by her himfelf, fhe became a common whore; then kept a coffeehoufe in Covent Garden; and a little after died of the French diftemper in a gaol.--I could tell you many more ftories; but how do you imagine he ferved me myfelf? You muft know, fir, I was bred a feafaring man, and have been many voyages; till at laft I came to be mafter of a fhip myfelf, and was in a fair way of making a fortune, when I was attacked by one of thofe curfed guarda-coftas who took our fhips before the beginning of the war; and after a fight, wherein I loft the greater part of my crew, my rigging being all demolifhed, and two fhots received between wind and water, I was forced to ftrike. The villains carried off my fhip, a brigantine of 150 tons--a pretty creature fhe was--and put me, a man, and a boy, into a little bad pink, in which, with much ado, we at laft made Falmouth; though I believe the Spaniards did not imagine fhe could poffibly live a day at fea. Upon my return hither, where my wife, who was of this country, then lived, the fquire told me he was fo pleafed with the defence I had made againft the enemy, that he did not fear getting me promoted to a lieutenancy of a man-of-war, if I would accept of it; which I thankfully affured him I would. Well, fir, two or three years paffed, during which I had many repeated promifes, not only from the fquire, but (as he told me) from the lords of the admiralty. He never returned from London but I was affured I might be fatiffied now, for I was certain of the firft vacancy; and, what furprizes me ftill, when I reflect on it, thefe affurances were given me with no lefs confidence, after fo many difappointments, than at firft. At laft, fir, growing weary, and fomewhat fufpicious, after fo much delay, I wrote to a friend in London, who I knew had fome acquaintance at the beft houfe in the admiralty, and defired him to back the fquire's intereft; for indeed I feared he had folicited the affair with more coldnefs than he pretended. And what anfwer do you think my friend fent me? Truly, fir, he acquainted me that the fquire had never mentioned my name at the admiralty in his life; and, unlefs I had much faithfuller intereft, advifed me to give over my pretenfions; which I immediately did, and, with the concurrence of my wife, refolved to fet up an alehoufe, where you are heartily welcome; and fo my fervice to you; and may the fquire, and all fuch fneaking rafcals, go to the devil together."--"O fie!" fays Adams, "O fie! He is indeed a wicked man; but G-- will, I hope, turn his heart to repentance. Nay, if he could but once fee the meannefs of this deteftable vice; would he but once reflect that he is one of the moft fcandalous as well as pernicious lyars; fure he muft defpife himfelf to fo intolerable a degree, that it would be impoffible for him to continue a moment in fuch a courfe. And to confefs the truth, notwithftanding the bafenefs of this character, which he hath too well deferved, he hath in his countenance fufficient fymptoms of that _bona indoles_, that fweetnefs of difpofition, which furnifhes out a good Chriftian."--"Ah, mafter! mafter!" fays the hoft, "if you had travelled as far as I have, and converfed with the many nations where I have traded, you would not give any credit to a man's countenance. Symptoms in his countenance, quotha! I would look there, perhaps, to fee whether a man had the fmall-pox, but for nothing elfe." He fpoke this with fo little regard to the parfon's obfervation, that it a good deal nettled him; and, taking the pipe haftily from his mouth, he thus anfwered: "Mafter of mine, perhaps I have travelled a great deal farther than you without the affiftance of a fhip. Do you imagine failing by different cities or countries is travelling? No. "Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. "I can go farther in an afternoon than you in a twelvemonth. What, I fuppofe you have feen the Pillars of Hercules, and perhaps the walls of Carthage. Nay, you may have heard Scylla, and feen Charybdis; you may have entered the clofet where Archimedes was found at the taking of Syracufe. I fuppofe you have failed among the Cyclades, and paffed the famous ftraits which take their name from the unfortunate Helle, whofe fate is fweetly defcribed by Apollonius Rhodius; you have paffed the very fpot, I conceive, where Daedalus fell into that fea, his waxen wings being melted by the fun; you have traverfed the Euxine fea, I make no doubt; nay, you may have been on the banks of the Cafpian, and called at Colchis, to fee if there is ever another golden fleece." "Not I, truly, mafter," anfwered the hoft: "I never touched at any of thefe places."--"But I have been at all thefe," replied Adams. "Then, I fuppofe," cries the hoft, "you have been at the Eaft Indies; for there are no fuch, I will be fworn, either in the Weft or the Levant."--"Pray where's the Levant?" quoth Adams; "that fhould be in the Eaft Indies by right." "Oho! you are a pretty traveller," cries the hoft, "and not know the Levant! My fervice to you, mafter; you muft not talk of thefe things with me! you muft not tip us the traveller; it won't go here." "Since thou art fo dull to mifunderftand me ftill," quoth Adams, "I will inform thee; the travelling I mean is in books, the only way of travelling by which any knowledge is to be acquired. From them I learn what I afferted juft now, that nature generally imprints fuch a portraiture of the mind in the countenance, that a fkilful phyfiognomift will rarely be deceived. I prefume you have never read the ftory of Socrates to this purpofe, and therefore I will tell it you. A certain phyfiognomift afferted of Socrates, that he plainly difcovered by his features that he was a rogue in his nature. A character fo contrary to the tenour of all this great man's actions, and the generally received opinion concerning him, incenfed the boys of Athens fo that they threw ftones at the phyfiognomift, and would have demolifhed him for his ignorance, had not Socrates himfelf prevented them by confeffing the truth of his obfervations, and acknowledging that, though he corrected his difpofition by philofophy, he was indeed naturally as inclined to vice as had been predicated of him. Now, pray refolve me--How fhould a man know this ftory if he had not read it?" "Well, mafter," faid the hoft, "and what fignifies it whether a man knows it or no? He who goes abroad, as I have done, will always have opportunities enough of knowing the world without troubling his head with Socrates, or any fuch fellows." "Friend," cries Adams, "if a man fhould fail round the world, and anchor in every harbour of it, without learning, he would return home as ignorant as he went out." "Lord help you!" anfwered the hoft; "there was my boatfwain, poor fellow! he could fcarce either write or read, and yet he would navigate a fhip with any mafter of a man-of-war; and a very pretty knowledge of trade he had too." "Trade," anfwered Adams, "as Ariftotle proves in his firft chapter of Politics, is below a philofopher, and unnatural as it is managed now." The hoft looked ftedfaftly at Adams, and after a minute's filence afked him, "If he was one of the writers of the Gazetteers? for I have heard," fays he, "they are writ by parfons." "Gazetteers!" anfwered Adams, "what is that?" "It is a dirty newfpaper," replied the hoft, "which hath been given away all over the nation for thefe many years, to abufe trade and honeft men, which I would not fuffer to lye on my table, though it hath been offered me for nothing." "Not I truly," faid Adams; "I never write anything but fermons; and I affure you I am no enemy to trade, whilft it is confiftent with honefty; nay, I have always looked on the tradefman as a very valuable member of fociety, and, perhaps, inferior to none but the man of learning." "No, I believe he is not, nor to him neither," anfwered the hoft. "Of what ufe would learning be in a country without trade? What would all you parfons do to clothe your backs and feed your bellies? Who fetches you your filks, and your linens, and your wines, and all the other neceffaries of life? I fpeak chiefly with regard to the failors." "You fhould fay the extravagancies of life," replied the parfon; "but admit they were the neceffaries, there is fomething more neceffary than life itfelf, which is provided by learning; I mean the learning of the clergy. Who clothes you with piety, meeknefs, humility, charity, patience, and all the other Chriftian virtues? Who feeds your fouls with the milk of brotherly love, and diets them with all the dainty food of holinefs, which at once cleanfes them of all impure carnal affections, and fattens them with the truly rich fpirit of grace? Who doth this?" "Ay, who, indeed?" cries the hoft; "for I do not remember ever to have feen any fuch clothing or fuch feeding. And fo, in the mean time, mafter, my fervice to you." Adams was going to anfwer with fome feverity, when Jofeph and Fanny returned and preffed his departure fo eagerly that he would not refufe them; and fo, grafping his crabftick, he took leave of his hoft (neither of them being fo well pleafed with each other as they had been at their firft fitting down together), and with Jofeph and Fanny, who both expreffed much impatience, departed, and now all together renewed their journey. BOOK III. CHAPTER I. _Matter prefatory in praife of biography._ Notwithftanding the preference which may be vulgarly given to the authority of thofe romance writers who entitle their books "the Hiftory of England, the Hiftory of France, of Spain, &c.," it is moft certain that truth is to be found only in the works of thofe who celebrate the lives of great men, and are commonly called biographers, as the others fhould indeed be termed topographers, or chorographers; words which might well mark the diftinction between them; it being the bufinefs of the latter chiefly to defcribe countries and cities, which, with the affiftance of maps, they do pretty juftly, and may be depended upon; but as to the actions and characters of men, their writings are not quite fo authentic, of which there needs no other proof than thofe eternal contradictions occurring between two topographers who undertake the hiftory of the fame country: for inftance, between my Lord Clarendon and Mr Whitelocke, between Mr Echard and Rapin, and many others; where, facts being fet forth in a different light, every reader believes as he pleafes; and, indeed, the more judicious and fufpicious very juftly efteem the whole as no other than a romance, in which the writer hath indulged a happy and fertile invention. But though thefe widely differ in the narrative of facts; fome afcribing victory to the one, and others to the other party; fome reprefenting the fame man as a rogue, while others give him a great and honeft character; yet all agree in the fcene where the fact is fuppofed to have happened, and where the perfon, who is both a rogue and an honeft man, lived. Now with us biographers the cafe is different; the facts we deliver may be relied on, though we often miftake the age and country wherein they happened: for, though it may be worth the examination of critics, whether the fhepherd Chryfoftom, who, as Cervantes informs us, died for love of the fair Marcella, who hated him, was ever in Spain, will any one doubt but that fuch a filly fellow hath really exifted? Is there in the world fuch a fceptic as to difbelieve the madnefs of Cardenio, the perfidy of Ferdinand, the impertinent curiofity of Anfelmo, the weaknefs of Camilla, the irrefolute friendfhip of Lothario? though perhaps, as to the time and place where thofe feveral perfons lived, that good hiftorian may be deplorably deficient. But the moft known inftance of this kind is in the true hiftory of Gil Blas, where the inimitable biographer hath made a notorious blunder in the country of Dr Sangrado, who ufed his patients as a vintner doth his wine-veffels, by letting out their blood, and filling them up with water. Doth not every one, who is the leaft verfed in phyfical hiftory, know that Spain was not the country in which this doctor lived? The fame writer hath likewife erred in the country of his archbifhop, as well as that of thofe great perfonages whofe underftandings were too fublime to tafte anything but tragedy, and in many others. The fame miftakes may likewife be obferved in Scarron, the Arabian Nights, the Hiftory of Marianne and le Paifan Parvenu, and perhaps fome few other writers of this clafs, whom I have not read, or do not at prefent recollect; for I would by no means be thought to comprehend thofe perfons of furprizing genius, the authors of immenfe romances, or the modern novel and Atalantis writers; who, without any affiftance from nature or hiftory, record perfons who never were, or will be, and facts which never did, nor poffibly can, happen; whofe heroes are of their own creation, and their brains the chaos whence all their materials are felected. Not that fuch writers deferve no honour; fo far otherwife, that perhaps they merit the higheft; for what can be nobler than to be as an example of the wonderful extent of human genius? One may apply to them what Balzac fays of Ariftotle, that they are a fecond nature (for they have no communication with the firft; by which, authors of an inferior clafs, who cannot ftand alone, are obliged to fupport themfelves as with crutches); but thefe of whom I am now fpeaking feem to be poffeffed of thofe ftilts, which the excellent Voltaire tells us, in his letters, "carry the genius far off, but with an regular pace." Indeed, far out of the fight of the reader, Beyond the realm of Chaos and old Night. But to return to the former clafs, who are contented to copy nature, inftead of forming originals from the confufed heap of matter in their own brains, is not fuch a book as that which records the achievements of the renowned Don Quixote more worthy the name of a hiftory than even Mariana's: for, whereas the latter is confined to a particular period of time, and to a particular nation, the former is the hiftory of the world in general, at leaft that part which is polifhed by laws, arts, and fciences; and of that from the time it was firft polifhed to this day; nay, and forwards as long as it fhall fo remain? I fhall now proceed to apply thefe obfervations to the work before us; for indeed I have fet them down principally to obviate fome conftructions which the good nature of mankind, who are always forward to fee their friends' virtues recorded, may put to particular parts. I queftion not but feveral of my readers will know the lawyer in the ftage-coach the moment they hear his voice. It is likewife odds but the wit and the prude meet with fome of their acquaintance, as well as all the reft of my characters. To prevent, therefore, any fuch malicious applications, I declare here, once for all, I defcribe not men, but manners; not an individual, but a fpecies. Perhaps it will be anfwered, Are not the characters then taken from life? To which I anfwer in the affirmative; nay, I believe I might aver that I have writ little more than I have feen. The lawyer is not only alive, but hath been fo thefe four thoufand years; and I hope G-- will indulge his life as many yet to come. He hath not indeed confined himfelf to one profeffion, one religion, or one country; but when the firft mean felfifh creature appeared on the human ftage, who made felf the centre of the whole creation, would give himfelf no pain, incur no danger, advance no money, to affift or preferve his fellow-creatures; then was our lawyer born; and, whilft fuch a perfon as I have defcribed exifts on earth, fo long fhall he remain upon it. It is, therefore, doing him little honour to imagine he endeavours to mimick fome little obfcure fellow, becaufe he happens to refemble him in one particular feature, or perhaps in his profeffion; whereas his appearance in the world is calculated for much more general and noble purpofes; not to expofe one pitiful wretch to the fmall and contemptible circle of his acquaintance; but to hold the glafs to thoufands in their clofets, that they may contemplate their deformity, and endeavour to reduce it, and thus by fuffering private mortification may avoid public fhame. This places the boundary between, and diftinguifhes the fatirift from the libeller: for the former privately corrects the fault for the benefit of the perfon, like a parent; the latter publickly expofes the perfon himfelf, as an example to others, like an executioner. There are befides little circumftances to be confidered; as the drapery of a picture, which though fafhion varies at different times, the refemblance of the countenance is not by thofe means diminifhed. Thus I believe we may venture to fay Mrs Tow-woufe is coeval with our lawyer: and, though perhaps, during the changes which fo long an exiftence muft have paffed through, fhe may in her turn have ftood behind the bar at an inn, I will not fcruple to affirm fhe hath likewife in the revolution of ages fat on a throne. In fhort, where extreme turbulency of temper, avarice, and an infenfibility of human mifery, with a degree of hypocrify, have united in a female compofition, Mrs Tow-woufe was that woman; and where a good inclination, eclipfed by a poverty of fpirit and underftanding, hath glimmered forth in a man, that man hath been no other than her fneaking hufband. I fhall detain my reader no longer than to give him one caution more of an oppofite kind: for, as in moft of our particular characters we mean not to lafh individuals, but all of the like fort, fo, in our general defcriptions, we mean not univerfals, but would be underftood with many exceptions: for inftance, in our defcription of high people, we cannot be intended to include fuch as, whilft they are an honour to their high rank, by a well-guided condefcenfion make their fuperiority as eafy as poffible to thofe whom fortune chiefly hath placed below them. Of this number I could name a peer no lefs elevated by nature than by fortune; who, whilft he wears the nobleft enfigns of honour on his perfon, bears the trueft ftamp of dignity on his mind, adorned with greatnefs, enriched with knowledge, and embellifhed with genius. I have feen this man relieve with generofity, while he hath converfed with freedom, and be to the fame perfon a patron and a companion. I could name a commoner, raifed higher above the multitude by fuperior talents than is in the power of his prince to exalt him, whofe behaviour to thofe he hath obliged is more amiable than the obligation itfelf; and who is fo great a mafter of affability, that, if he could diveft himfelf of an inherent greatnefs in his manner, would often make the loweft of his acquaintance forget who was the mafter of that palace in which they are fo courteoufly entertained. Thefe are pictures which muft be, I believe, known: I declare they are taken from the life, and not intended to exceed it. By thofe high people, therefore, whom I have defcribed, I mean a fet of wretches, who, while they are a difgrace to their anceftors, whofe honours and fortunes they inherit (or perhaps a greater to their mother, for fuch degeneracy is fcarce credible), have the infolence to treat thofe with difregard who are at leaft equal to the founders of their own fplendor. It is, I fancy, impoffible to conceive a fpectacle more worthy of our indignation, than that of a fellow, who is not only a blot in the efcutcheon of a great family, but a fcandal to the human fpecies, maintaining a fupercilious behaviour to men who are an honour to their nature and a difgrace to their fortune. And now, reader, taking thefe hints along with you, you may, if you pleafe, proceed to the fequel of this our true hiftory. CHAPTER II. _A night fcene, wherein feveral wonderful adventures befel Adams and his fellow-travellers._ It was fo late when our travellers left the inn or alehoufe (for it might be called either), that they had not travelled many miles before night overtook them, or met them, which you pleafe. The reader muft excufe me if I am not particular as to the way they took; for, as we are now drawing near the feat of the Boobies, and as that is a ticklifh name, which malicious perfons may apply, according to their evil inclinations, to feveral worthy country fquires, a race of men whom we look upon as entirely inoffenfive, and for whom we have an adequate regard, we fhall lend no affiftance to any fuch malicious purpofes. Darknefs had now overfpread the hemifphere, when Fanny whifpered Jofeph "that fhe begged to reft herfelf a little; for that fhe was fo tired fhe could walk no farther." Jofeph immediately prevailed with parfon Adams, who was as brifk as a bee, to ftop. He had no fooner feated himfelf than he lamented the lofs of his dear Aefchylus; but was a little comforted when reminded that, if he had it in his poffeffion, he could not fee to read. The fky was fo clouded, that not a ftar appeared. It was indeed, according to Milton, darknefs vifible. This was a circumftance, however, very favourable to Jofeph; for Fanny, not fufpicious of being overfeen by Adams, gave a loofe to her paffion which fhe had never done before, and, reclining her head on his bofom, threw her arm careleffly round him, and fuffered him to lay his cheek clofe to hers. All this infufed fuch happinefs into Jofeph, that he would not have changed his turf for the fineft down in the fineft palace in the univerfe. Adams fat at fome diftance from the lovers, and, being unwilling to difturb them, applied himfelf to meditation; in which he had not fpent much time before he difcovered a light at fome diftance that feemed approaching towards him. He immediately hailed it; but, to his forrow and furprize, it ftopped for a moment, and then difappeared. He then called to Jofeph, afking him, "if he had not feen the light?" Jofeph anfwered, "he had."--"And did you not mark how it vanifhed?" returned he: "though I am not afraid of ghofts, I do not abfolutely difbelieve them." He then entered into a meditation on thofe unfubftantial beings; which was foon interrupted by feveral voices, which he thought almoft at his elbow, though in fact they were not fo extremely near. However, he could diftinctly hear them agree on the murder of any one they met; and a little after heard one of them fay, "he had killed a dozen fince that day fortnight." Adams now fell on his knees, and committed himfelf to the care of Providence; and poor Fanny, who likewife heard thofe terrible words, embraced Jofeph fo clofely, that had not he, whofe ears were alfo open, been apprehenfive on her account, he would have thought no danger which threatened only himfelf too dear a price for fuch embraces. Jofeph now drew forth his penknife, and Adams, having finifhed his ejaculations, grafped his crab-ftick, his only weapon, and, coming up to Jofeph, would have had him quit Fanny, and place her in the rear; but his advice was fruitlefs; fhe clung clofer to him, not at all regarding the prefence of Adams, and in a foothing voice declared, "fhe would die in his arms." Jofeph, clafping her with inexpreffible eagernefs, whifpered her, "that he preferred death in hers to life out of them." Adams, brandifhing his crabftick, faid, "he defpifed death as much as any man," and then repeated aloud-- "Eft hic, eft animus lucis contemptor et illum, Qui vita bene credat emi quo tendis, honorem." Upon this the voices ceafed for a moment, and then one of them called out, "D--n you, who is there?" To which Adams was prudent enough to make no reply; and of a fudden he obferved half-a-dozen lights, which feemed to rife all at once from the ground and advance brifkly towards him. This he immediately concluded to be an apparition; and now, beginning to conceive that the voices were of the fame kind, he called out, "In the name of the L--d, what wouldft thou have?" He had no fooner fpoke than he heard one of the voices cry out, "D--n them, here they come;" and foon after heard feveral hearty blows, as if a number of men had been engaged at quarterftaff. He was juft advancing towards the place of combat, when Jofeph, catching him by the fkirts, begged him that they might take the opportunity of the dark to convey away Fanny from the danger which threatened her. He prefently complied, and, Jofeph lifting up Fanny, they all three made the beft of their way; and without looking behind them, or being overtaken, they had travelled full two miles, poor Fanny not once complaining of being tired, when they faw afar off feveral lights fcattered at a fmall diftance from each other, and at the fame time found themfelves on the defcent of a very fteep hill. Adams's foot flipping, he inftantly difappeared, which greatly frightened both Jofeph and Fanny: indeed, if the light had permitted them to fee it, they would fcarce have refrained laughing to fee the parfon rolling down the hill; which he did from top to bottom, without receiving any harm. He then hollowed as loud as he could, to inform them of his fafety, and relieve them from the fears which they had conceived for him. Jofeph and Fanny halted fome time, confidering what to do; at laft they advanced a few paces, where the declivity feemed leaft fteep; and then Jofeph, taking his Fanny in his arms, walked firmly down the hill, without making a falfe ftep, and at length landed her at the bottom, where Adams foon came to them. Learn hence, my fair countrywomen, to confider your own weaknefs, and the many occafions on which the ftrength of a man may be ufeful to you; and, duly weighing this, take care that you match not yourfelves with the fpindle-fhanked beaus and _petit-matres_ of the age, who, inftead of being able, like Jofeph Andrews, to carry you in lufty arms through the rugged ways and downhill fteeps of life, will rather want to fupport their feeble limbs with your ftrength and affiftance. Our travellers now moved forwards where the neareft light prefented itfelf; and, having croffed a common field, they came to a meadow, where they feemed to be at a very little diftance from the light, when, to their grief, they arrived at the banks of a river. Adams here made a full ftop, and declared he could fwim, but doubted how it was poffible to get Fanny over: to which Jofeph anfwered, "If they walked along its banks, they might be certain of foon finding a bridge, efpecially as by the number of lights they might be affured a parifh was near." "Odfo, that's true indeed," faid Adams; "I did not think of that." Accordingly, Jofeph's advice being taken, they paffed over two meadows, and came to a little orchard, which led them to a houfe. Fanny begged of Jofeph to knock at the door, affuring him "fhe was fo weary that fhe could hardly ftand on her feet." Adams, who was foremoft, performed this ceremony; and, the door being immediately opened, a plain kind of man appeared at it: Adams acquainted him "that they had a young woman with them who was fo tired with her journey that he fhould be much obliged to him if he would fuffer her to come in and reft herfelf." The man, who faw Fanny by the light of the candle which he held in his hand, perceiving her innocent and modeft look, and having no apprehenfions from the civil behaviour of Adams, prefently anfwered, "That the young woman was very welcome to reft herfelf in his houfe, and fo were her company." He then ufhered them into a very decent room, where his wife was fitting at a table: fhe immediately rofe up, and affifted them in fetting forth chairs, and defired them to fit down; which they had no fooner done than the man of the houfe afked them if they would have anything to refrefh themfelves with? Adams thanked him, and anfwered he fhould be obliged to him for a cup of his ale, which was likewife chofen by Jofeph and Fanny. Whilft he was gone to fill a very large jug with this liquor, his wife told Fanny fhe feemed greatly fatigued, and defired her to take fomething ftronger than ale; but fhe refufed with many thanks, faying it was true fhe was very much tired, but a little reft fhe hoped would reftore her. As foon as the company were all feated, Mr Adams, who had filled himfelf with ale, and by public permiffion had lighted his pipe, turned to the mafter of the houfe, afking him, "If evil fpirits did not ufe to walk in that neighbourhood?" To which receiving no anfwer, he began to inform him of the adventure which they met with on the downs; nor had he proceeded far in the ftory when fomebody knocked very hard at the door. The company expreffed fome amazement, and Fanny and the good woman turned pale: her hufband went forth, and whilft he was abfent, which was fome time, they all remained filent, looking at one another, and heard feveral voices difcourfing pretty loudly. Adams was fully perfuaded that fpirits were abroad, and began to meditate fome exorcifms; Jofeph a little inclined to the fame opinion; Fanny was more afraid of men; and the good woman herfelf began to fufpect her guefts, and imagined thofe without were rogues belonging to their gang. At length the mafter of the houfe returned, and, laughing, told Adams he had difcovered his apparition; that the murderers were fheep-ftealers, and the twelve perfons murdered were no other than twelve fheep; adding, that the fhepherds had got the better of them, had fecured two, and were proceeding with them to a juftice of peace. This account greatly relieved the fears of the whole company; but Adams muttered to himfelf, "He was convinced of the truth of apparitions for all that." They now fat chearfully round the fire, till the mafter of the houfe, having furveyed his guefts, and conceiving that the caffock, which, having fallen down, appeared under Adams's greatcoat, and the fhabby livery on Jofeph Andrews, did not well fuit with the familiarity between them, began to entertain fome fufpicions not much to their advantage: addreffing himfelf therefore to Adams, he faid, "He perceived he was a clergyman by his drefs, and fuppofed that honeft man was his footman." "Sir," anfwered Adams, "I am a clergyman at your fervice; but as to that young man, whom you have rightly termed honeft, he is at prefent in nobody's fervice; he never lived in any other family than that of Lady Booby, from whence he was difcharged, I affure you, for no crime." Jofeph faid, "He did not wonder the gentleman was furprized to fee one of Mr Adams's character condefcend to fo much goodnefs with a poor man."--"Child," faid Adams, "I fhould be afhamed of my cloth if I thought a poor man, who is honeft, below my notice or my familiarity. I know not how thofe who think otherwife can profefs themfelves followers and fervants of Him who made no diftinction, unlefs, peradventure, by preferring the poor to the rich.--Sir," faid he, addreffing himfelf to the gentleman, "thefe two poor young people are my parifhioners, and I look on them and love them as my children. There is fomething fingular enough in their hiftory, but I have not now time to recount it." The mafter of the houfe, notwithftanding the fimplicity which difcovered itfelf in Adams, knew too much of the world to give a hafty belief to profeffions. He was not yet quite certain that Adams had any more of the clergyman in him than his caffock. To try him therefore further, he afked him, "If Mr Pope had lately publifhed anything new?" Adams anfwered, "He had heard great commendations of that poet, but that he had never read nor knew any of his works."--"Ho! ho!" fays the gentleman to himfelf, "have I caught you? What!" faid he, "have you never feen his Homer?" Adams anfwered, "he had never read any tranflation of the clafficks." "Why, truly," reply'd the gentleman, "there is a dignity in the Greek language which I think no modern tongue can reach."--"Do you underftand Greek, fir?" faid Adams haftily. "A little, fir," anfwered the gentleman. "Do you know, fir," cry'd Adams, "where I can buy an Aefchylus? an unlucky miffortune lately happened to mine." Aefchylus was beyond the gentleman, though he knew him very well by name; he therefore, returning back to Homer, afked Adams, "What part of the Iliad he thought moft excellent?" Adams returned, "His queftion would be properer, What kind of beauty was the chief in poetry? for that Homer was equally excellent in them all. And, indeed," continued he, "what Cicero fays of a complete orator may well be applied to a great poet: 'He ought to comprehend all perfections.' Homer did this in the moft excellent degree; it is not without reafon, therefore, that the philofopher, in the twenty-fecond chapter of his Poeticks, mentions him by no other appellation than that of the Poet. He was the father of the drama as well as the epic; not of tragedy only, but of comedy alfo; for his Margites, which is deplorably loft, bore, fays Ariftotle, the fame analogy to comedy as his Odyffey and Iliad to tragedy. To him, therefore, we owe Ariftophanes as well as Euripides, Sophocles, and my poor Aefchylus. But if you pleafe we will confine ourfelves (at leaft for the prefent) to the Iliad, his nobleft work; though neither Ariftotle nor Horace give it the preference, as I remember, to the Odyffey. Firft, then, as to his fubject, can anything be more fimple, and at the fame time more noble? He is rightly praifed by the firft of thofe judicious critics for not chufing the whole war, which, though he fays it hath a complete beginning and end, would have been too great for the underftanding to comprehend at one view. I have, therefore, often wondered why fo correct a writer as Horace fhould, in his epiftle to Lollius, call him the Trojani Belli Scriptorem. Secondly, his action, termed by Ariftotle, Pragmaton Syftafis; is it poffible for the mind of man to conceive an idea of fuch perfect unity, and at the fame time fo replete with greatnefs? And here I muft obferve, what I do not remember to have feen noted by any, the Harmotton, that agreement of his action to his fubject: for, as the fubject is anger, how agreeable is his action, which is war; from which every incident arifes and to which every epifode immediately relates. Thirdly, his manners, which Ariftotle places fecond in his defcription of the feveral parts of tragedy, and which he fays are included in the action; I am at a lofs whether I fhould rather admire the exactnefs of his judgment in the nice diftinction or the immenfity of his imagination in their variety. For, as to the former of thefe, how accurately is the fedate, injured refentment of Achilles, diftinguifhed from the hot, infulting paffion of Agamemnon! How widely doth the brutal courage of Ajax differ from the amiable bravery of Diomedes; and the wifdom of Neftor, which is the refult of long reflection and experience, from the cunning of Ulyffes, the effect of art and fubtlety only! If we confider their variety, we may cry out, with Ariftotle in his 24th chapter, that no part of this divine poem is deftitute of manners. Indeed, I might affirm that there is fcarce a character in human nature untouched in fome part or other. And, as there is no paffion which he is not able to defcribe, fo is there none in his reader which he cannot raife. If he hath any fuperior excellence to the reft, I have been inclined to fancy it is in the pathetic. I am fure I never read with dry eyes the two epifodes where Andromache is introduced in the former lamenting the danger, and in the latter the death, of Hector. The images are fo extremely tender in thefe, that I am convinced the poet had the worthieft and beft heart imaginable. Nor can I help obferving how Sophocles falls fhort of the beauties of the original, in that imitation of the diffuafive fpeech of Andromache which he hath put into the mouth of Tecmeffa. And yet Sophocles was the greateft genius who ever wrote tragedy; nor have any of his fucceffors in that art, that is to fay, neither Euripides nor Seneca the tragedian, been able to come near him. As to his fentiments and diction, I need fay nothing; the former are particularly remarkable for the utmoft perfection on that head, namely, propriety; and as to the latter, Ariftotle, whom doubtlefs you have read over and over, is very diffufe. I fhall mention but one thing more, which that great critic in his divifion of tragedy calls Opfis, or the fcenery; and which is as proper to the epic as to the drama, with this difference, that in the former it falls to the fhare of the poet, and in the latter to that of the painter. But did ever painter imagine a fcene like that in the 13th and 14th Iliads? where the reader fees at one view the profpect of Troy, with the army drawn up before it; the Grecian army, camp, and fleet; Jupiter fitting on Mount Ida, with his head wrapt in a cloud, and a thunderbolt in his hand, looking towards Thrace; Neptune driving through the fea, which divides on each fide to permit his paffage, and then feating himfelf on Mount Samos; the heavens opened, and the deities all feated on their thrones. This is fublime! This is poetry!" Adams then rapt out a hundred Greek verfes, and with fuch a voice, emphafis, and action, that he almoft frightened the women; and as for the gentleman, he was fo far from entertaining any further fufpicion of Adams, that he now doubted whether he had not a bifhop in his houfe. He ran into the moft extravagant encomiums on his learning; and the goodnefs of his heart began to dilate to all the ftrangers. He faid he had great compaffion for the poor young woman, who looked pale and faint with her journey; and in truth he conceived a much higher opinion of her quality than it deferved. He faid he was forry he could not accommodate them all; but if they were contented with his firefide, he would fit up with the men; and the young woman might, if fhe pleafed, partake his wife's bed, which he advifed her to; for that they muft walk upwards of a mile to any houfe of entertainment, and that not very good neither. Adams, who liked his feat, his ale, his tobacco, and his company, perfuaded Fanny to accept this kind propofal, in which follicitation he was feconded by Jofeph. Nor was fhe very difficultly prevailed on; for fhe had flept little the laft night and not at all the preceding; fo that love itfelf was fcarce able to keep her eyes open any longer. The offer, therefore, being kindly accepted, the good woman produced everything eatable in her houfe on the table, and the guefts, being heartily invited, as heartily regaled themfelves, efpecially parfon Adams. As to the other two, they were examples of the truth of that phyfical obfervation, that love, like other fweet things, is no whetter of the ftomach. Supper was no fooner ended, than Fanny at her own requeft retired, and the good woman bore her company. The man of the houfe, Adams, and Jofeph, who would modeftly have withdrawn, had not the gentleman infifted on the contrary, drew round the firefide, where Adams (to ufe his own words) replenifhed his pipe, and the gentleman produced a bottle of excellent beer, being the beft liquor in his houfe. The modeft behaviour of Jofeph, with the gracefulnefs of his perfon, the character which Adams gave of him, and the friendfhip he feemed to entertain for him, began to work on the gentleman's affections, and raifed in him a curiofity to know the fingularity which Adams had mentioned in his hiftory. This curiofity Adams was no fooner informed of than, with Jofeph's confent, he agreed to gratify it; and accordingly related all he knew, with as much tendernefs as was poffible for the character of Lady Booby; and concluded with the long, faithful, and mutual paffion between him and Fanny, not concealing the meannefs of her birth and education. Thefe latter circumftances entirely cured a jealoufy which had lately rifen in the gentleman's mind, that Fanny was the daughter of fome perfon of fafhion, and that Jofeph had run away with her, and Adams was concerned in the plot. He was now enamoured of his guefts, drank their healths with great chearfulnefs, and returned many thanks to Adams, who had fpent much breath, for he was a circumftantial teller of a ftory. Adams told him it was now in his power to return that favour; for his extraordinary goodnefs, as well as that fund of literature he was mafter of,[A] which he did not expect to find under fuch a roof, had raifed in him more curiofity than he had ever known. "Therefore," faid he, "if it be not too troublefome, fir, your hiftory, if you pleafe." [A] The author hath by fome been reprefented to have made a blunder here: for Adams had indeed fhown fome learning (fay they), perhaps all the author had; but the gentleman hath fhown none, unlefs his approbation of Mr Adams be fuch: but furely it would be prepofterous in him to call it fo. I have, however, notwithftanding this criticifm, which I am told came from the mouth of a great orator in a public coffee-houfe, left this blunder as it ftood in the firft edition. I will not have the vanity to apply to anything in this work the obfervation which M. Dacier makes in her preface to her Ariftophanes: _Je tiens pour une maxime conftante, qu'une beaut mediocr plait plus gnralement qu'une beaut fans dfaut._ Mr Congreve hath made fuch another blunder in his Love for Love, where Tattle tells Mifs Prue, "She fhould admire him as much for the beauty he commends in her as if he himfelf was poffeffed of it." The gentleman anfwered, he could not refufe him what he had fo much right to infift on; and after fome of the common apologies, which are the ufual preface to a ftory, he thus began. CHAPTER III. _In which the gentleman relates the hiftory of his life._ Sir, I am defcended of a good family, and was born a gentleman. My education was liberal, and at a public fchool, in which I proceeded fo far as to become mafter of the Latin, and to be tolerably verfed in the Greek language. My father died when I was fixteen, and left me mafter of myfelf. He bequeathed me a moderate fortune, which he intended I fhould not receive till I attained the age of twenty-five: for he conftantly afferted that was full early enough to give up any man entirely to the guidance of his own difcretion. However, as this intention was fo obfcurely worded in his will that the lawyers advifed me to conteft the point with my truftees, I own I paid fo little regard to the inclinations of my dead father, which were fufficiently certain to me, that I followed their advice, and foon fucceeded, for the truftees did not conteft the matter very obftinately on their fide. "Sir," faid Adams, "may I crave the favour of your name?" The gentleman anfwered his name was Wilfon, and then proceeded. I ftayed a very little while at fchool after his death; for, being a forward youth, I was extremely impatient to be in the world, for which I thought my parts, knowledge, and manhood thoroughly qualified me. And to this early introduction into life, without a guide, I impute all my future miffortunes; for, befides the obvious mifchiefs which attend this, there is one which hath not been fo generally obferved: the firft impreffion which mankind receives of you will be very difficult to eradicate. How unhappy, therefore, muft it be to fix your character in life, before you can poffibly know its value, or weigh the confequences of thofe actions which are to eftablifh your future reputation! A little under feventeen I left my fchool, and went to London with no more than fix pounds in my pocket; a great fum, as I then conceived; and which I was afterwards furprized to find fo foon confumed. The character I was ambitious of attaining was that of a fine gentleman; the firft requifites to which I apprehended were to be fupplied by a taylor, a periwig-maker, and fome few more tradefmen, who deal in furnifhing out the human body. Notwithftanding the lownefs of my purfe, I found credit with them more eafily than I expected, and was foon equipped to my wifh. This I own then agreeably furprized me; but I have fince learned that it is a maxim among many tradefmen at the polite end of the town to deal as largely as they can, reckon as high as they can, and arreft as foon as they can. The next qualifications, namely, dancing, fencing, riding the great horfe, and mufic, came into my head: but, as they required expenfe and time, I comforted myfelf, with regard to dancing, that I had learned a little in my youth, and could walk a minuet genteelly enough; as to fencing, I thought my good-humour would preferve me from the danger of a quarrel; as to the horfe, I hoped it would not be thought of; and for mufic, I imagined I could eafily acquire the reputation of it; for I had heard fome of my fchoolfellows pretend to knowledge in operas, without being able to fing or play on the fiddle. Knowledge of the town feemed another ingredient; this I thought I fhould arrive at by frequenting public places. Accordingly I paid conftant attendance to them all; by which means I was foon mafter of the fafhionable phrafes, learned to cry up the fafhionable diverfions, and knew the names and faces of the moft fafhionable men and women. Nothing now feemed to remain but an intrigue, which I was refolved to have immediately; I mean the reputation of it; and indeed I was fo fucceffful, that in a very fhort time I had half-a-dozen with the fineft women in town. At thefe words Adams fetched a deep groan, and then, bleffing himfelf, cried out, "Good Lord! what wicked times thefe are!" Not fo wicked as you imagine, continued the gentleman; for I affure you they were all veftal virgins for anything which I knew to the contrary. The reputation of intriguing with them was all I fought, and was what I arrived at: and perhaps I only flattered myfelf even in that; for very probably the perfons to whom I fhowed their billets knew as well as I that they were counterfeits, and that I had written them to myfelf. "Write letters to yourfelf!" faid Adams, ftaring. O fir, anfwered the gentleman, it is the very error of the times. Half our modern plays have one of thefe characters in them. It is incredible the pains I have taken, and the abfurd methods I employed, to traduce the character of women of diftinction. When another had fpoken in raptures of any one, I have anfwered, "D--n her, fhe! We fhall have her at H----d's very foon." When he hath replied, "He thought her virtuous," I have anfwered, "Ay, thou wilt always think a woman virtuous, till fhe is in the ftreets; but you and I, Jack or Tom (turning to another in company), know better." At which I have drawn a paper out of my pocket, perhaps a taylor's bill, and kiffed it, crying at the fame time, "By Gad I was once fond of her." "Proceed, if you pleafe, but do not fwear any more," faid Adams. Sir, faid the gentleman, I afk your pardon. Well, fir, in this courfe of life I continued full three years.--"What courfe of life?" anfwered Adams; "I do not remember you have mentioned any."--Your remark is juft, faid the gentleman, fmiling; I fhould rather have faid, in this courfe of doing nothing. I remember fome time afterwards I wrote the journal of one day, which would ferve, I believe, as well for any other during the whole time. I will endeavour to repeat it to you. In the morning I arofe, took my great ftick, and walked out in my green frock, with my hair in papers (a groan from Adams), and fauntered about till ten. Went to the auction; told lady ---- fhe had a dirty face; laughed heartily at fomething captain ---- faid, I can't remember what, for I did not very well hear it; whifpered lord ----; bowed to the duke of ----; and was going to bid for a fnuff-box, but did not, for fear I fhould have had it. From 2 to 4, dreft myfelf. _A groan._ 4 to 6, dined. _A groan._ 6 to 8, coffee-houfe. 8 to 9, Drury-lane playhoufe. 9 to 10, Lincoln's Inn Fields. 10 to 12, Drawing-room. _A great groan._ At all which places nothing happened worth remark. At which Adams faid, with fome vehemence, "Sir, this is below the life of an animal, hardly above vegetation: and I am furprized what could lead a man of your fenfe into it." What leads us into more follies than you imagine, doctor, anfwered the gentleman--vanity; for as contemptible a creature as I was, and I affure you, yourfelf cannot have more contempt for fuch a wretch than I now have, I then admired myfelf, and fhould have defpifed a perfon of your prefent appearance (you will pardon me), with all your learning and thofe excellent qualities which I have remarked in you. Adams bowed, and begged him to proceed. After I had continued two years in this courfe of life, faid the gentleman, an accident happened which obliged me to change the fcene. As I was one day at St James's coffee-houfe, making very free with the character of a young lady of quality, an officer of the guards, who was prefent, thought proper to give me the lye. I anfwered I might poffibly be miftaken, but I intended to tell no more than the truth. To which he made no reply but by a fcornful fneer. After this I obferved a ftrange coldnefs in all my acquaintance; none of them fpoke to me firft, and very few returned me even the civility of a bow. The company I ufed to dine with left me out, and within a week I found myfelf in as much folitude at St James's as if I had been in a defart. An honeft elderly man, with a great hat and long fword, at laft told me he had a compaffion for my youth, and therefore advifed me to fhow the world I was not fuch a rafcal as they thought me to be. I did not at firft underftand him; but he explained himfelf, and ended with telling me, if I would write a challenge to the captain, he would, out of pure charity, go to him with it. "A very charitable perfon, truly!" cried Adams. I defired till the next day, continued the gentleman, to confider on it, and, retiring to my lodgings, I weighed the confequences on both fides as fairly as I could. On the one, I faw the rifk of this alternative, either lofing my own life, or having on my hands the blood of a man with whom I was not in the leaft angry. I foon determined that the good which appeared on the other was not worth this hazard. I therefore refolved to quit the fcene, and prefently retired to the Temple, where I took chambers. Here I foon got a frefh fet of acquaintance, who knew nothing of what had happened to me. Indeed, they were not greatly to my approbation; for the beaus of the Temple are only the fhadows of the others. They are the affectation of affectation. The vanity of thefe is ftill more ridiculous, if poffible, than of the others. Here I met with fmart fellows who drank with lords they did not know, and intrigued with women they never faw. Covent Garden was now the fartheft ftretch of my ambition; where I fhone forth in the balconies at the playhoufes, vifited whores, made love to orange-wenches, and damned plays. This career was foon put a ftop to by my furgeon, who convinced me of the neceffity of confining myfelf to my room for a month. At the end of which, having had leifure to reflect, I refolved to quit all farther converfation with beaus and fmarts of every kind, and to avoid, if poffible, any occafion of returning to this place of confinement. "I think," faid Adams, "the advice of a month's retirement and reflection was very proper; but I fhould rather have expected it from a divine than a furgeon." The gentleman fmiled at Adams's fimplicity, and, without explaining himfelf farther on fuch an odious fubject, went on thus: I was no fooner perfectly reftored to health than I found my paffion for women, which I was afraid to fatiffy as I had done, made me very uneafy; I determined, therefore, to keep a miftrefs. Nor was I long before I fixed my choice on a young woman, who had before been kept by two gentlemen, and to whom I was recommended by a celebrated bawd. I took her home to my chambers, and made her a fettlement during cohabitation. This would, perhaps, have been very ill paid: however, fhe did not fuffer me to be perplexed on that account; for, before quarter-day, I found her at my chambers in too familiar converfation with a young fellow who was dreft like an officer, but was indeed a city apprentice. Inftead of excufing her inconftancy, fhe rapped out half-a-dozen oaths, and, fnapping her fingers at me, fwore fhe fcorned to confine herfelf to the beft man in England. Upon this we parted, and the fame bawd prefently provided her another keeper. I was not fo much concerned at our feparation as I found, within a day or two, I had reafon to be for our meeting; for I was obliged to pay a fecond vifit to my furgeon. I was now forced to do penance for fome weeks, during which time I contracted an acquaintance with a beautiful young girl, the daughter of a gentleman who, after having been forty years in the army, and in all the campaigns under the Duke of Marlborough, died a lieutenant on half-pay, and had left a widow, with this only child, in very diftreft circumftances: they had only a fmall penfion from the government, with what little the daughter could add to it by her work, for fhe had great excellence at her needle. This girl was, at my firft acquaintance with her, folicited in marriage by a young fellow in good circumftances. He was apprentice to a linendraper, and had a little fortune, fufficient to fet up his trade. The mother was greatly pleafed with this match, as indeed fhe had fufficient reafon. However, I foon prevented it. I reprefented him in fo low a light to his miftrefs, and made fo good an ufe of flattery, promifes, and prefents, that, not to dwell longer on this fubject than is neceffary, I prevailed with the poor girl, and conveyed her away from her mother! In a word, I debauched her.--(At which words Adams ftarted up, fetched three ftrides acrofs the room, and then replaced himfelf in his chair.) You are not more affected with this part of my ftory than myfelf; I affure you it will never be fufficiently repented of in my own opinion: but, if you already deteft it, how much more will your indignation be raifed when you hear the fatal confequences of this barbarous, this villanous action! If you pleafe, therefore, I will here defift.--"By no means," cries Adams; "go on, I befeech you; and Heaven grant you may fincerely repent of this and many other things you have related!"--I was now, continued the gentleman, as happy as the poffeffion of a fine young creature, who had a good education, and was endued with many agreeable qualities, could make me. We lived fome months with vaft fondnefs together, without any company or converfation, more than we found in one another: but this could not continue always; and, though I ftill preferved great affection for her, I began more and more to want the relief of other company, and confequently to leave her by degrees--at laft whole days to herfelf. She failed not to teftify fome uneafinefs on thefe occafions, and complained of the melancholy life fhe led; to remedy which, I introduced her into the acquaintance of fome other kept miftreffes, with whom fhe ufed to play at cards, and frequent plays and other diverfions. She had not lived long in this intimacy before I perceived a vifible alteration in her behaviour; all her modefty and innocence vanifhed by degrees, till her mind became thoroughly tainted. She affected the company of rakes, gave herfelf all manner of airs, was never eafy but abroad, or when fhe had a party at my chambers. She was rapacious of money, extravagant to excefs, loofe in her converfation; and, if ever I demurred to any of her demands, oaths, tears, and fits were the immediate confequences. As the firft raptures of fondnefs were long fince over, this behaviour foon eftranged my affections from her; I began to reflect with pleafure that fhe was not my wife, and to conceive an intention of parting with her; of which, having given her a hint, fhe took care to prevent me the pains of turning her out of doors, and accordingly departed herfelf, having firft broken open my efcrutore, and taken with her all fhe could find, to the amount of about 200. In the firft heat of my refentment I refolved to purfue her with all the vengeance of the law: but, as fhe had the good luck to efcape me during that ferment, my paffion afterwards cooled; and, having reflected that I had been the firft aggreffor, and had done her an injury for which I could make her no reparation, by robbing her of the innocence of her mind; and hearing at the fame time that the poor old woman her mother had broke her heart on her daughter's elopement from her, I, concluding myfelf her murderer ("As you very well might," cries Adams, with a groan), was pleafed that God Almighty had taken this method of punifhing me, and refolved quietly to fubmit to the lofs. Indeed, I could wifh I had never heard more of the poor creature, who became in the end an abandoned profligate; and, after being fome years a common proftitute, at laft ended her miferable life in Newgate.--Here the gentleman fetched a deep figh, which Mr Adams echoed very loudly; and both continued filent, looking on each other for fome minutes. At laft the gentleman proceeded thus: I had been perfectly conftant to this girl during the whole time I kept her: but fhe had fcarce departed before I difcovered more marks of her infidelity to me than the lofs of my money. In fhort, I was forced to make a third vifit to my furgeon, out of whofe hands I did not get a hafty difcharge. I now forfwore all future dealings with the fex, complained loudly that the pleafure did not compenfate the pain, and railed at the beautiful creatures in as grofs language as Juvenal himfelf formerly reviled them in. I looked on all the town harlots with a deteftation not eafy to be conceived, their perfons appeared to me as painted palaces, inhabited by Difeafe and Death: nor could their beauty make them more defirable objects in my eyes than gilding could make me covet a pill, or golden plates a coffin. But though I was no longer the abfolute flave, I found fome reafons to own myfelf ftill the fubject, of love. My hatred for women decreafed daily; and I am not pofitive but time might have betrayed me again to fome common harlot, had I not been fecured by a paffion for the charming Sapphira, which, having once entered upon, made a violent progrefs in my heart. Sapphira was wife to a man of fafhion and gallantry, and one who feemed, I own, every way worthy of her affections; which, however, he had not the reputation of having. She was indeed a coquette _acheve_. "Pray, fir," fays Adams, "what is a coquette? I have met with the word in French authors, but never could affign any idea to it. I believe it is the fame with _une fotte,_ Anglic, a fool." Sir, anfwered the gentleman, perhaps you are not much miftaken; but, as it is a particular kind of folly, I will endeavour to defcribe it. Were all creatures to be ranked in the order of creation according to their ufefulnefs, I know few animals that would not take place of a coquette; nor indeed hath this creature much pretence to anything beyond inftinct; for, though fometimes we might imagine it was animated by the paffion of vanity, yet far the greater part of its actions fall beneath even that low motive; for inftance, feveral abfurd geftures and tricks, infinitely more foolifh than what can be obferved in the moft ridiculous birds and beafts, and which would perfuade the beholder that the filly wretch was aiming at our contempt. Indeed its characteriftic is affectation, and this led and governed by whim only: for as beauty, wifdom, wit, good-nature, politenefs, and health are fometimes affected by this creature, fo are uglinefs, folly, nonfenfe, ill-nature, ill-breeding, and ficknefs likewife put on by it in their turn. Its life is one conftant lie; and the only rule by which you can form any judgment of them is, that they are never what they feem. If it was poffible for a coquette to love (as it is not, for if ever it attains this paffion the coquette ceafes inftantly), it would wear the face of indifference, if not of hatred, to the beloved object; you may therefore be affured, when they endeavour to perfuade you of their liking, that they are indifferent to you at leaft. And indeed this was the cafe of my Sapphira, who no fooner faw me in the number of her admirers than fhe gave me what is commonly called encouragement: fhe would often look at me, and, when fhe perceived me meet her eyes, would inftantly take them off, difcovering at the fame time as much furprize and emotion as poffible. Thefe arts failed not of the fuccefs fhe intended; and, as I grew more particular to her than the reft of her admirers, fhe advanced, in proportion, more directly to me than to the others. She affected the low voice, whifper, lifp, figh, ftart, laugh, and many other indications of paffion which daily deceive thoufands. When I played at whift with her, fhe would look earneftly at me, and at the fame time lofe deal or revoke; then burft into a ridiculous laugh and cry, "La! I can't imagine what I was thinking of." To detain you no longer, after I had gone through a fufficient courfe of gallantry, as I thought, and was thoroughly convinced I had raifed a violent paffion in my miftrefs, I fought an opportunity of coming to an eclairciffement with her. She avoided this as much as poffible; however, great affiduity at length prefented me one. I will not defcribe all the particulars of this interview; let it fuffice that, when fhe could no longer pretend not to fee my drift, fhe firft affected a violent furprize, and immediately after as violent a paffion: fhe wondered what I had feen in her conduct which could induce me to affront her in this manner; and, breaking from me the firft moment fhe could, told me I had no other way to efcape the confequence of her refentment than by never feeing, or at leaft fpeaking to her more. I was not contented with this anfwer; I ftill purfued her, but to no purpofe; and was at length convinced that her hufband had the fole poffeffion of her perfon, and that neither he nor any other had made any impreffion on her heart. I was taken off from following this _ignis fatuus_ by fome advances which were made me by the wife of a citizen, who, though neither very young nor handfome, was yet too agreeable to be rejected by my amorous conftitution. I accordingly foon fatiffied her that fhe had not caft away her hints on a barren or cold foil: on the contrary, they inftantly produced her an eager and defiring lover. Nor did fhe give me any reafon to complain; fhe met the warmth fhe had raifed with equal ardour. I had no longer a coquette to deal with, but one who was wifer than to proftitute the noble paffion of love to the ridiculous luft of vanity. We prefently underftood one another; and, as the pleafures we fought lay in a mutual gratification, we foon found and enjoyed them. I thought myfelf at firft greatly happy in the poffeffion of this new miftrefs, whofe fondnefs would have quickly furfeited a more fickly appetite; but it had a different effect on mine: fhe carried my paffion higher by it than youth or beauty had been able. But my happinefs could not long continue uninterrupted. The apprehenfions we lay under from the jealoufy of her hufband gave us great uneafinefs. "Poor wretch! I pity him," cried Adams. He did indeed deferve it, faid the gentleman; for he loved his wife with great tendernefs; and, I affure you, it is a great fatiffaction to me that I was not the man who firft feduced her affections from him. Thefe apprehenfions appeared alfo too well grounded, for in the end he difcovered us, and procured witneffes of our careffes. He then profecuted me at law, and recovered 3000 damages, which much diftreffed my fortune to pay; and, what was worfe, his wife, being divorced, came upon my hands. I led a very uneafy life with her; for, befides that my paffion was now much abated, her exceffive jealoufy was very troublefome. At length death rid me of an inconvenience which the confideration of my having been the author of her miffortunes would never fuffer me to take any other method of difcarding. I now bad adieu to love, and refolved to purfue other lefs dangerous and expenfive pleafures. I fell into the acquaintance of a fet of jolly companions, who flept all day and drank all night; fellows who might rather be faid to confume time than to live. Their beft converfation was nothing but noife: finging, hollowing, wrangling, drinking, toafting, fp--wing, fmoaking were the chief ingredients of our entertainment. And yet, bad as thefe were, they were more tolerable than our graver fcenes, which were either exceffive tedious narratives of dull common matters of fact, or hot difputes about trifling matters, which commonly ended in a wager. This way of life the firft ferious reflection put a period to; and I became member of a club frequented by young men of great abilities. The bottle was now only called in to the affiftance of our converfation, which rolled on the deepeft points of philofophy. Thefe gentlemen were engaged in a fearch after truth, in the purfuit of which they threw afide all the prejudices of education, and governed themfelves only by the infallible guide of human reafon. This great guide, after having fhown them the falfehood of that very ancient but fimple tenet, that there is fuch a being as a Deity in the univerfe, helped them to eftablifh in his ftead a certain rule of right, by adhering to which they all arrived at the utmoft purity of morals. Reflection made me as much delighted with this fociety as it had taught me to defpife and deteft the former. I began now to efteem myfelf a being of a higher order than I had ever before conceived; and was the more charmed with this rule of right, as I really found in my own nature nothing repugnant to it. I held in utter contempt all perfons who wanted any other inducement to virtue befides her intrinfic beauty and excellence; and had fo high an opinion of my prefent companions, with regard to their morality, that I would have trufted them with whatever was neareft and deareft to me. Whilft I was engaged in this delightful dream, two or three accidents happened fucceffively, which at firft much furprized me;--for one of our greateft philofophers, or rule-of-right men, withdrew himfelf from us, taking with him the wife of one of his moft intimate friends. Secondly, another of the fame fociety left the club without remembering to take leave of his bail. A third, having borrowed a fum of money of me, for which I received no fecurity, when I afked him to repay it, abfolutely denied the loan. Thefe feveral practices, fo inconfiftent with our golden rule, made me begin to fufpect its infallibility; but when I communicated my thoughts to one of the club, he faid, "There was nothing abfolutely good or evil in itfelf; that actions were denominated good or bad by the circumftances of the agent. That poffibly the man who ran away with his neighbour's wife might be one of very good inclinations, but over-prevailed on by the violence of an unruly paffion; and, in other particulars, might be a very worthy member of fociety; that if the beauty of any woman created in him an uneafinefs, he had a right from nature to relieve himfelf;"--with many other things, which I then detefted fo much, that I took leave of the fociety that very evening and never returned to it again. Being now reduced to a ftate of folitude which I did not like, I became a great frequenter of the playhoufes, which indeed was always my favourite diverfion; and moft evenings paffed away two or three hours behind the fcenes, where I met with feveral poets, with whom I made engagements at the taverns. Some of the players were likewife of our parties. At thefe meetings we were generally entertained by the poets with reading their performances, and by the players with repeating their parts: upon which occafions, I obferved the gentleman who furnifhed our entertainment was commonly the beft pleafed of the company; who, though they were pretty civil to him to his face, feldom failed to take the firft opportunity of his abfence to ridicule him. Now I made fome remarks which probably are too obvious to be worth relating. "Sir," fays Adams, "your remarks if you pleafe." Firft then, fays he, I concluded that the general obfervation, that wits are moft inclined to vanity, is not true. Men are equally vain of riches, ftrength, beauty, honours, &c. But thefe appear of themfelves to the eyes of the beholders, whereas the poor wit is obliged to produce his performance to fhow you his perfection; and on his readinefs to do this that vulgar opinion I have before mentioned is grounded; but doth not the perfon who expends vaft fums in the furniture of his houfe or the ornaments of his perfon, who confumes much time and employs great pains in dreffing himfelf, or who thinks himfelf paid for felf-denial, labour, or even villany, by a title or a ribbon, facrifice as much to vanity as the poor wit who is defirous to read you his poem or his play? My fecond remark was, that vanity is the worft of paffions, and more apt to contaminate the mind than any other: for, as felfifhnefs is much more general than we pleafe to allow it, fo it is natural to hate and envy thofe who ftand between us and the good we defire. Now, in luft and ambition thefe are few; and even in avarice we find many who are no obftacles to our purfuits; but the vain man feeks pre-eminence; and everything which is excellent or praifeworthy in another renders him the mark of his antipathy. Adams now began to fumble in his pockets, and foon cried out, "O la! I have it not about me." Upon this, the gentleman afking him what he was fearching for, he faid he fearched after a fermon, which he thought his mafterpiece, againft vanity. "Fie upon it, fie upon it!" cries he, "why do I ever leave that fermon out of my pocket? I wifh it was within five miles; I would willingly fetch it, to read it you." The gentleman anfwered that there was no need, for he was cured of the paffion. "And for that very reafon," quoth Adams, "I would read it, for I am confident you would admire it: indeed, I have never been a greater enemy to any paffion than that filly one of vanity." The gentleman fmiled, and proceeded--From this fociety I eafily paffed to that of the gamefters, where nothing remarkable happened but the finifhing my fortune, which thofe gentlemen foon helped me to the end of. This opened fcenes of life hitherto unknown; poverty and diftrefs, with their horrid train of duns, attorneys, bailiffs, haunted me day and night. My clothes grew fhabby, my credit bad, my friends and acquaintance of all kinds cold. In this fituation the ftrangeft thought imaginable came into my head; and what was this but to write a play? for I had fufficient leifure: fear of bailiffs confined me every day to my room: and, having always had a little inclination and fomething of a genius that way, I fet myfelf to work, and within a few months produced a piece of five acts, which was accepted of at the theatre. I remembered to have formerly taken tickets of other poets for their benefits, long before the appearance of their performances; and, refolving to follow a precedent which was fo well fuited to my prefent circumftances, I immediately provided myfelf with a large number of little papers. Happy indeed would be the ftate of poetry, would thefe tickets pafs current at the bakehoufe, the ale-houfe, and the chandler's fhop: but alas! far otherwife; no taylor will take them in payment for buckram, canvas, ftay-tape; nor no bailiff for civility money. They are, indeed, no more than a paffport to beg with; a certificate that the owner wants five fhillings, which induces well-difpofed Chriftians to charity. I now experienced what is worfe than poverty, or rather what is the worft confequence of poverty--I mean attendance and dependance on the great. Many a morning have I waited hours in the cold parlours of men of quality; where, after feeing the loweft rafcals in lace and embroidery, the pimps and buffoons in fafhion, admitted, I have been fometimes told, on fending in my name, that my lord could not poffibly fee me this morning; a fufficient affurance that I fhould never more get entrance into that houfe. Sometimes I have been at laft admitted; and the great man hath thought proper to excufe himfelf, by telling me he was tied up. "Tied up," fays Adams, "pray what's that?" Sir, fays the gentleman, the profit which bookfellers allowed authors for the beft works was fo very fmall, that certain men of birth and fortune fome years ago, who were the patrons of wit and learning, thought fit to encourage them farther by entering into voluntary fubfcriptions for their encouragement. Thus Prior, Rowe, Pope, and fome other men of genius, received large fums for their labours from the public. This feemed fo eafy a method of getting money, that many of the loweft fcribblers of the times ventured to publifh their works in the fame way; and many had the affurance to take in fubfcriptions for what was not writ, nor ever intended. Subfcriptions in this manner growing infinite, and a kind of tax on the publick, fome perfons, finding it not fo eafy a tafk to difcern good from bad authors, or to know what genius was worthy encouragement and what was not, to prevent the expenfe of fubfcribing to fo many, invented a method to excufe themfelves from all fubfcriptions whatever; and this was to receive a fmall fum of money in confideration of giving a large one if ever they fubfcribed; which many have done, and many more have pretended to have done, in order to filence all folicitation. The fame method was likewife taken with playhoufe tickets, which were no lefs a public grievance; and this is what they call being tied up from fubfcribing. "I can't fay but the term is apt enough, and fomewhat typical," faid Adams; "for a man of large fortune, who ties himfelf up, as you call it, from the encouragement of men of merit, ought to be tied up in reality." Well, fir, fays the gentleman, to return to my ftory. Sometimes I have received a guinea from a man of quality, given with as ill a grace as alms are generally to the meaneft beggar; and purchafed too with as much time fpent in attendance as, if it had been fpent in honeft induftry, might have brought me more profit with infinitely more fatiffaction. After about two months fpent in this difagreeable way, with the utmoft mortification, when I was pluming my hopes on the profpect of a plentiful harveft from my play, upon applying to the prompter to know when it came into rehearfal, he informed me he had received orders from the managers to return me the play again, for that they could not poffibly act it that feafon; but, if I would take it and revife it againft the next, they would be glad to fee it again. I fnatched it from him with great indignation, and retired to my room, where I threw myfelf on the bed in a fit of defpair. "You fhould rather have thrown yourfelf on your knees," fays Adams, "for defpair is finful." As foon, continued the gentleman, as I had indulged the firft tumult of my paffion, I began to confider coolly what courfe I fhould take, in a fituation without friends, money, credit, or reputation of any kind. After revolving many things in my mind, I could fee no other poffibility of furnifhing myfelf with the miferable neceffaries of life than to retire to a garret near the Temple, and commence hackney-writer to the lawyers, for which I was well qualified, being an excellent penman. This purpofe I refolved on, and immediately put it in execution. I had an acquaintance with an attorney who had formerly tranfacted affairs for me, and to him I applied; but, inftead of furnifhing me with any bufinefs, he laughed at my undertaking, and told me, "He was afraid I fhould turn his deeds into plays, and he fhould expect to fee them on the ftage." Not to tire you with inftances of this kind from others, I found that Plato himfelf did not hold poets in greater abhorrence than thefe men of bufinefs do. Whenever I durft venture to a coffeehoufe, which was on Sundays only, a whifper ran round the room, which was conftantly attended with a fneer--That's poet Wilfon; for I know not whether you have obferved it, but there is a malignity in the nature of man, which, when not weeded out, or at leaft covered by a good education and politenefs, delights in making another uneafy or diffatiffied with himfelf. This abundantly appears in all affemblies, except thofe which are filled by people of fafhion, and efpecially among the younger people of both fexes whofe birth and fortunes place them juft without the polite circles; I mean the lower clafs of the gentry, and the higher of the mercantile world, who are, in reality, the worft-bred part of mankind. Well, fir, whilft I continued in this miferable ftate, with fcarce fufficient bufinefs to keep me from ftarving, the reputation of a poet being my bane, I accidentally became acquainted with a bookfeller, who told me, "It was a pity a man of my learning and genius fhould be obliged to fuch a method of getting his livelihood; that he had a compaffion for me, and, if I would engage with him, he would undertake to provide handfomely for me." A man in my circumftances, as he very well knew, had no choice. I accordingly accepted his propofal with his conditions, which were none of the moft favourable, and fell to tranflating with all my might. I had no longer reafon to lament the want of bufinefs; for he furnifhed me with fo much, that in half a year I almoft writ myfelf blind. I likewife contracted a diftemper by my fedentary life, in which no part of my body was exercifed but my right arm, which rendered me incapable of writing for a long time. This unluckily happening to delay the publication of a work, and my laft performance not having fold well, the bookfeller declined any further engagement, and afperfed me to his brethren as a carelefs idle fellow. I had, however, by having half worked and half ftarved myfelf to death during the time I was in his fervice, faved a few guineas, with which I bought a lottery-ticket, refolving to throw myfelf into Fortune's lap, and try if fhe would make me amends for the injuries fhe had done me at the gaming-table. This purchafe, being made, left me almoft pennylefs; when, as if I had not been fufficiently miferable, a bailiff in woman's clothes got admittance to my chamber, whither he was directed by the bookfeller. He arrefted me at my taylor's fuit for thirty-five pounds; a fum for which I could not procure bail; and was therefore conveyed to his houfe, where I was locked up in an upper chamber. I had now neither health (for I was fcarce recovered from my indifpofition), liberty, money, or friends; and had abandoned all hopes, and even the defire, of life. "But this could not laft long," faid Adams; "for doubtlefs the taylor releafed you the moment he was truly acquainted with your affairs, and knew that your circumftances would not permit you to pay him." "Oh, fir," anfwered the gentleman, "he knew that before he arrefted me; nay, he knew that nothing but incapacity could prevent me paying my debts; for I had been his cuftomer many years, had fpent vaft fums of money with him, and had always paid moft punctually in my profperous days; but when I reminded him of this, with affurances that, if he would not moleft my endeavours, I would pay him all the money I could by my utmoft labour and induftry procure, referving only what was fufficient to preferve me alive, he anfwered, his patience was worn out; that I had put him off from time to time; that he wanted the money; that he had put it into a lawyer's hands; and if I did not pay him immediately, or find fecurity, I muft die in gaol and expect no mercy." "He may expect mercy," cries Adams, ftarting from his chair, "where he will find none! How can fuch a wretch repeat the Lord's Prayer; where the word, which is tranflated, I know not for what reafon, trefpaffes, is in the original, debts? And as furely as we do not forgive others their debts, when they are unable to pay them, fo furely fhall we ourfelves be unforgiven when we are in no condition of paying." He ceafed, and the gentleman proceeded. While I was in this deplorable fituation, a former acquaintance, to whom I had communicated my lottery-ticket, found me out, and, making me a vifit, with great delight in his countenance, fhook me heartily by the hand, and wifhed me joy of my good fortune: for, fays he, your ticket is come up a prize of 3000. Adams fnapped his fingers at thefe words in an ecftafy of joy; which, however, did not continue long; for the gentleman thus proceeded:--Alas! fir, this was only a trick of Fortune to fink me the deeper; for I had difpofed of this lottery-ticket two days before to a relation, who refufed lending me a fhilling without it, in order to procure myfelf bread. As foon as my friend was acquainted with my unfortunate fale he began to revile me and remind me of all the ill-conduct and mifcarriages of my life. He faid I was one whom Fortune could not fave if fhe would; that I was now ruined without any hopes of retrieval, nor muft expect any pity from my friends; that it would be extreme weaknefs to compaffionate the miffortunes of a man who ran headlong to his own deftruction. He then painted to me, in as lively colours as he was able, the happinefs I fhould have now enjoyed, had I not foolifhly difpofed of my ticket. I urged the plea of neceffity; but he made no anfwer to that, and began again to revile me, till I could bear it no longer, and defired him to finifh his vifit. I foon exchanged the bailiff's houfe for a prifon; where, as I had not money fufficient to procure me a feparate apartment, I was crouded in with a great number of miferable wretches, in common with whom I was deftitute of every convenience of life, even that which all the brutes enjoy, wholefome air. In thefe dreadful circumftances I applied by letter to feveral of my old acquaintance, and fuch to whom I had formerly lent money without any great profpect of its being returned, for their affiftance; but in vain. An excufe, inftead of a denial, was the gentleft anfwer I received. Whilft I languifhed in a condition too horrible to be defcribed, and which, in a land of humanity, and, what is much more, Chriftianity, feems a ftrange punifhment for a little inadvertency and indifcretion; whilft I was in this condition, a fellow came into the prifon, and, enquiring me out, delivered me the following letter:-- "SIR,--My father, to whom you fold your ticket in the laft lottery, died the fame day in which it came up a prize, as you have poffibly heard, and left me fole heirefs of all his fortune. I am fo much touched with your prefent circumftances, and the uneafinefs you muft feel at having been driven to difpofe of what might have made you happy, that I muft defire your acceptance of the enclofed, and am your humble fervant, "HARRIET HEARTY." And what do you think was enclofed? "I don't know," cried Adams; "not lefs than a guinea, I hope." Sir, it was a bank-note for 200.--"200?" fays Adams, in a rapture. No lefs, I affure you, anfwered the gentleman; a fum I was not half fo delighted with as with the dear name of the generous girl that fent it me; and who was not only the beft but the handfomeft creature in the univerfe, and for whom I had long had a paffion which I never durft difclofe to her. I kiffed her name a thoufand times, my eyes overflowing with tendernefs and gratitude; I repeated--But not to detain you with thefe raptures, I immediately acquired my liberty; and, having paid all my debts, departed, with upwards of fifty pounds in my pocket, to thank my kind deliverer. She happened to be then out of town, a circumftance which, upon reflection, pleafed me; for by that means I had an opportunity to appear before her in a more decent drefs. At her return to town, within a day or two, I threw myfelf at her feet with the moft ardent acknowledgments, which fhe rejected with an unfeigned greatnefs of mind, and told me I could not oblige her more than by never mentioning, or if poffible thinking on, a circumftance which muft bring to my mind an accident that might be grievous to me to think on. She proceeded thus: "What I have done is in my own eyes a trifle, and perhaps infinitely lefs than would have become me to do. And if you think of engaging in any bufinefs where a larger fum may be ferviceable to you, I fhall not be over-rigid either as to the fecurity or intereft." I endeavoured to exprefs all the gratitude in my power to this profufion of goodnefs, though perhaps it was my enemy, and began to afflict my mind with more agonies than all the miferies I had underwent; it affected me with feverer reflections than poverty, diftrefs, and prifons united had been able to make me feel; for, fir, thefe acts and profeffions of kindnefs, which were fufficient to have raifed in a good heart the moft violent paffion of friendfhip to one of the fame, or to age and uglinefs in a different fex, came to me from a woman, a young and beautiful woman; one whofe perfections I had long known, and for whom I had long conceived a violent paffion, though with a defpair which made me endeavour rather to curb and conceal, than to nourifh or acquaint her with it. In fhort, they came upon me united with beauty, foftnefs, and tendernefs: fuch bewitching fmiles!--O Mr Adams, in that moment I loft myfelf, and, forgetting our different fituations, nor confidering what return I was making to her goodnefs by defiring her, who had given me fo much, to beftow her all, I laid gently hold on her hand, and, conveying it to my lips, I preft it with inconceivable ardour; then, lifting up my fwimming eyes, I faw her face and neck overfpread with one blufh; fhe offered to withdraw her hand, yet not fo as to deliver it from mine, though I held it with the gentleft force. We both ftood trembling; her eyes caft on the ground, and mine ftedfaftly fixed on her. Good G--d, what was then the condition of my foul! burning with love, defire, admiration, gratitude, and every tender paffion, all bent on one charming object. Paffion at laft got the better of both reafon and refpect, and, foftly letting go her hand, I offered madly to clafp her in my arms; when, a little recovering herfelf, fhe ftarted from me, afking me, with fome fhow of anger, "If fhe had any reafon to expect this treatment from me." I then fell proftrate before her, and told her, if I had offended, my life was abfolutely in her power, which I would in any manner lofe for her fake. Nay, madam, faid I, you fhall not be fo ready to punifh me as I to fuffer. I own my guilt. I deteft the reflection that I would have facrificed your happinefs to mine. Believe me, I fincerely repent my ingratitude; yet, believe me too, it was my paffion, my unbounded paffion for you, which hurried me fo far: I have loved you long and tenderly, and the goodnefs you have fhown me hath innocently weighed down a wretch undone before. Acquit me of all mean, mercenary views; and, before I take my leave of you for ever, which I am refolved inftantly to do, believe me that Fortune could have raifed me to no height to which I could not have gladly lifted you. O, curft be Fortune!--"Do not," fays fhe, interrupting me with the fweeteft voice, "do not curfe Fortune, fince fhe hath made me happy; and, if fhe hath put your happinefs in my power, I have told you you fhall afk nothing in reafon which I will refufe." Madam, faid I, you miftake me if you imagine, as you feem, my happinefs is in the power of Fortune now. You have obliged me too much already; if I have any wifh, it is for fome bleft accident, by which I may contribute with my life to the leaft augmentation of your felicity. As for myfelf, the only happinefs I can ever have will be hearing of yours; and if Fortune will make that complete, I will forgive her all her wrongs to me. "You may, indeed," anfwered fhe, fmiling, "for your own happinefs muft be included in mine. I have long known your worth; nay, I muft confefs," faid fhe, blufhing, "I have long difcovered that paffion for me you profefs, notwithftanding thofe endeavours, which I am convinced were unaffected, to conceal it; and if all I can give with reafon will not fuffice, take reafon away; and now I believe you cannot afk me what I will deny."--She uttered thefe words with a fweetnefs not to be imagined. I immediately ftarted; my blood, which lay freezing at my heart, rufhed tumultuoufly through every vein. I ftood for a moment filent; then, flying to her, I caught her in my arms, no longer refifting, and foftly told her fhe muft give me then herfelf. O, fir! can I defcribe her look? She remained filent, and almoft motionlefs, feveral minutes. At laft, recovering herfelf a little, fhe infifted on my leaving her, and in fuch a manner that I inftantly obeyed: you may imagine, however, I foon faw her again.--But I afk pardon: I fear I have detained you too long in relating the particulars of the former interview. "So far otherwife," faid Adams, licking his lips, "that I could willingly hear it over again." Well, fir, continued the gentleman, to be as concife as poffible, within a week fhe confented to make me the happieft of mankind. We were married fhortly after; and when I came to examine the circumftances of my wife's fortune (which, I do affure you, I was not prefently at leifure enough to do), I found it amounted to about fix thoufand pounds, moft part of which lay in effects; for her father had been a wine-merchant, and fhe feemed willing, if I liked it, that I fhould carry on the fame trade. I readily, and too inconfiderately, undertook it; for, not having been bred up to the fecrets of the bufinefs, and endeavouring to deal with the utmoft honefty and uprightnefs, I foon found our fortune in a declining way, and my trade decreafing by little and little; for my wines, which I never adulterated after their importation, and were fold as neat as they came over, were univerfally decried by the vintners, to whom I could not allow them quite as cheap as thofe who gained double the profit by a lefs price. I foon began to defpair of improving our fortune by thefe means; nor was I at all eafy at the vifits and familiarity of many who had been my acquaintance in my profperity, but had denied and fhunned me in my adverfity, and now very forwardly renewed their acquaintance with me. In fhort, I had fufficiently feen that the pleafures of the world are chiefly folly, and the bufinefs of it moftly knavery, and both nothing better than vanity; the men of pleafure tearing one another to pieces from the emulation of fpending money, and the men of bufinefs from envy in getting it. My happinefs confifted entirely in my wife, whom I loved with an inexpreffible fondnefs, which was perfectly returned; and my profpects were no other than to provide for our growing family; for fhe was now big of her fecond child: I therefore took an opportunity to afk her opinion of entering into a retired life, which, after hearing my reafons and perceiving my affection for it, fhe readily embraced. We foon put our fmall fortune, now reduced under three thoufand pounds, into money, with part of which we purchafed this little place, whither we retired foon after her delivery, from a world full of buftle, noife, hatred, envy, and ingratitude, to eafe, quiet, and love. We have here lived almoft twenty years, with little other converfation than our own, moft of the neighbourhood taking us for very ftrange people; the fquire of the parifh reprefenting me as a madman, and the parfon as a prefbyterian, becaufe I will not hunt with the one nor drink with the other. "Sir," fays Adams, "Fortune hath, I think, paid you all her debts in this fweet retirement." Sir, replied the gentleman, I am thankful to the great Author of all things for the bleffings I here enjoy. I have the beft of wives, and three pretty children, for whom I have the true tendernefs of a parent. But no bleffings are pure in this world: within three years of my arrival here I loft my eldeft fon. (Here he fighed bitterly.) "Sir," fays Adams, "we muft fubmit to Providence, and confider death as common to all." We muft fubmit, indeed, anfwered the gentleman; and if he had died I could have borne the lofs with patience; but alas! fir, he was ftolen away from my door by fome wicked travelling people whom they call gipfies; nor could I ever, with the moft diligent fearch, recover him. Poor child! he had the fweeteft look--the exact picture of his mother; at which fome tears unwittingly dropt from his eyes, as did likewife from thofe of Adams, who always fympathized with his friends on thofe occafions. Thus, fir, faid the gentleman, I have finifhed my ftory, in which if I have been too particular, I afk your pardon; and now, if you pleafe, I will fetch you another bottle: which propofal the parfon thankfully accepted. CHAPTER IV. _A defcription of Mr Wilfon's way of living. The tragical adventure of the dog, and other grave matters._ The gentleman returned with the bottle; and Adams and he fat fome time filent, when the former ftarted up, and cried, "No, that won't do." The gentleman inquired into his meaning; he anfwered, "He had been confidering that it was poffible the late famous king Theodore might have been that very fon whom he had loft;" but added, "that his age could not anfwer that imagination. However," fays he, "G-- difpofes all things for the beft; and very probably he may be fome great man, or duke, and may, one day or other, revifit you in that capacity." The gentleman anfwered, he fhould know him amongft ten thoufand, for he had a mark on his left breaft of a ftrawberry, which his mother had given him by longing for that fruit. That beautiful young lady the Morning now rofe from her bed, and with a countenance blooming with frefh youth and fprightlinefs, like Mifs ----[A], with foft dews hanging on her pouting lips, began to take her early walk over the eaftern hills; and prefently after, that gallant perfon the Sun ftole foftly from his wife's chamber to pay his addreffes to her; when the gentleman afked his gueft if he would walk forth and furvey his little garden, which he readily agreed to, and Jofeph at the fame time awaking from a fleep in which he had been two hours buried, went with them. No parterres, no fountains, no ftatues, embellifhed this little garden. Its only ornament was a fhort walk, fhaded on each fide by a filbert-hedge, with a fmall alcove at one end, whither in hot weather the gentleman and his wife ufed to retire and divert themfelves with their children, who played in the walk before them. But, though vanity had no votary in this little fpot, here was variety of fruit and everything ufeful for the kitchen, which was abundantly fufficient to catch the admiration of Adams, who told the gentleman he had certainly a good gardener. Sir, anfwered he, that gardener is now before you: whatever you fee here is the work folely of my own hands. Whilft I am providing neceffaries for my table, I likewife procure myfelf an appetite for them. In fair feafons I feldom pafs lefs than fix hours of the twenty-four in this place, where I am not idle; and by thefe means I have been able to preferve my health ever fince my arrival here, without affiftance from phyfic. Hither I generally repair at the dawn, and exercife myfelf whilft my wife dreffes her children and prepares our breakfaft; after which we are feldom afunder during the refidue of the day, for, when the weather will not permit them to accompany me here, I am ufually within with them; for I am neither afhamed of converfing with my wife nor of playing with my children: to fay the truth, I do not perceive that inferiority of underftanding which the levity of rakes, the dulnefs of men of bufinefs, or the aufterity of the learned, would perfuade us of in women. As for my woman, I declare I have found none of my own fex capable of making jufter obfervations on life, or of delivering them more agreeably; nor do I believe any one poffeffed of a faithfuller or braver friend. And fure as this friendfhip is fweetened with more delicacy and tendernefs, fo is it confirmed by dearer pledges than can attend the clofeft male alliance; for what union can be fo faft as our common intereft in the fruits of our embraces? Perhaps, fir, you are not yourfelf a father; if you are not, be affured you cannot conceive the delight I have in my little ones. Would you not defpife me if you faw me ftretched on the ground, and my children playing round me? "I fhould reverence the fight," quoth Adams; "I myfelf am now the father of fix, and have been of eleven, and I can fay I never fcourged a child of my own, unlefs as his fchoolmafter, and then have felt every ftroke on my own pofteriors. And as to what you fay concerning women, I have often lamented my own wife did not underftand Greek."--The gentleman fmiled, and anfwered, he would not be apprehended to infinuate that his own had an underftanding above the care of her family; on the contrary, fays he, my Harriet, I affure you, is a notable houfewife, and few gentlemen's houfekeepers underftand cookery or confectionery better; but thefe are arts which fhe hath no great occafion for now: however, the wine you commended fo much laft night at fupper was of her own making, as is indeed all the liquor in my houfe, except my beer, which falls to my province. "And I affure you it is as excellent," quoth Adams, "as ever I tafted." We formerly kept a maid-fervant, but fince my girls have been growing up fhe is unwilling to indulge them in idlenefs; for as the fortunes I fhall give them will be very fmall, we intend not to breed them above the rank they are likely to fill hereafter, nor to teach them to defpife or ruin a plain hufband. Indeed, I could wifh a man of my own temper, and a retired life, might fall to their lot; for I have experienced that calm ferene happinefs, which is feated in content, is inconfiftent with the hurry and buftle of the world. He was proceeding thus when the little things, being juft rifen, ran eagerly towards him and afked him bleffing. They were fhy to the ftrangers, but the eldeft acquainted her father, that her mother and the young gentlewoman were up, and that breakfaft was ready. They all went in, where the gentleman was furprized at the beauty of Fanny, who had now recovered herfelf from her fatigue, and was entirely clean dreft; for the rogues who had taken away her purfe had left her her bundle. But if he was fo much amazed at the beauty of this young creature, his guefts were no lefs charmed at the tendernefs which appeared in the behaviour of the hufband and wife to each other, and to their children, and at the dutiful and affectionate behaviour of thefe to their parents. Thefe inftances pleafed the well-difpofed mind of Adams equally with the readinefs which they expreft to oblige their guefts, and their forwardnefs to offer them the beft of everything in their houfe; and what delighted him ftill more was an inftance or two of their charity; for whilft they were at breakfaft the good woman was called for to affift her fick neighbour, which fhe did with fome cordials made for the public ufe, and the good man went into his garden at the fame time to fupply another with fomething which he wanted thence, for they had nothing which thofe who wanted it were not welcome to. Thefe good people were in the utmoft cheerfulnefs, when they heard the report of a gun, and immediately afterwards a little dog, the favourite of the eldeft daughter, came limping in all bloody and laid himfelf at his miftrefs's feet: the poor girl, who was about eleven years old, burft into tears at the fight; and prefently one of the neighbours came in and informed them that the young fquire, the fon of the lord of the manor, had fhot him as he paft by, fwearing at the fame time he would profecute the mafter of him for keeping a fpaniel, for that he had given notice he would not fuffer one in the parifh. The dog, whom his miftrefs had taken into her lap, died in a few minutes, licking her hand. She expreft great agony at his lofs, and the other children began to cry for their fifter's miffortune; nor could Fanny herfelf refrain. Whilft the father and mother attempted to comfort her, Adams grafped his crabftick and would have fallied out after the fquire had not Jofeph withheld him. He could not however bridle his tongue--he pronounced the word rafcal with great emphafis; faid he deferved to be hanged more than a highwayman, and wifhed he had the fcourging him. The mother took her child, lamenting and carrying the dead favourite in her arms, out of the room, when the gentleman faid this was the fecond time this fquire had endeavoured to kill the little wretch, and had wounded him fmartly once before; adding, he could have no motive but ill-nature, for the little thing, which was not near as big as one's fift, had never been twenty yards from the houfe in the fix years his daughter had had it. He faid he had done nothing to deferve this ufage, but his father had too great a fortune to contend with: that he was as abfolute as any tyrant in the univerfe, and had killed all the dogs and taken away all the guns in the neighbourhood; and not only that, but he trampled down hedges and rode over corn and gardens, with no more regard than if they were the highway. "I wifh I could catch him in my garden," faid Adams, "though I would rather forgive him riding through my houfe than fuch an ill-natured act as this." The cheerfulnefs of their converfation being interrupted by this accident, in which the guefts could be of no fervice to their kind entertainer; and as the mother was taken up in adminiftering confolation to the poor girl, whofe difpofition was too good haftily to forget the fudden lofs of her little favourite, which had been fondling with her a few minutes before; and as Jofeph and Fanny were impatient to get home and begin thofe previous ceremonies to their happinefs which Adams had infifted on, they now offered to take their leave. The gentleman importuned them much to ftay dinner; but when he found their eagernefs to depart he fummoned his wife; and accordingly, having performed all the ufual ceremonies of bows and curtfies more pleafant to be feen than to be related, they took their leave, the gentleman and his wife heartily wifhing them a good journey, and they as heartily thanking them for their kind entertainment. They then departed, Adams declaring that this was the manner in which the people had lived in the golden age. [A] Whoever the reader pleafes. CHAPTER V. _A difputation on fchools held on the road between Mr Abraham Adams and Jofeph; and a difcovery not unwelcome to them both._ Our travellers, having well refrefhed themfelves at the gentleman's houfe, Jofeph and Fanny with fleep, and Mr Abraham Adams with ale and tobacco, renewed their journey with great alacrity; and purfuing the road into which they were directed, travelled many miles before they met with any adventure worth relating. In this interval we fhall prefent our readers with a very curious difcourfe, as we apprehend it, concerning public fchools, which paffed between Mr Jofeph Andrews and Mr Abraham Adams. They had not gone far before Adams, calling to Jofeph, afked him, "If he had attended to the gentleman's ftory?" He anfwered, "To all the former part."--"And don't you think," fays he, "he was a very unhappy man in his youth?"--"A very unhappy man, indeed," anfwered the other. "Jofeph," cries Adams, fcrewing up his mouth, "I have found it; I have difcovered the caufe of all the miffortunes which befel him: a public fchool, Jofeph, was the caufe of all the calamities which he afterwards fuffered. Public fchools are the nurferies of all vice and immorality. All the wicked fellows whom I remember at the univerfity were bred at them.--Ah, Lord! I can remember as well as if it was but yefterday, a knot of them; they called them King's fcholars, I forget why--very wicked fellows! Jofeph, you may thank the Lord you were not bred at a public fchool; you would never have preferved your virtue as you have. The firft care I always take is of a boy's morals; I had rather he fhould be a blockhead than an atheift or a prefbyterian. What is all the learning in the world compared to his immortal foul? What fhall a man take in exchange for his foul? But the mafters of great fchools trouble themfelves about no fuch thing. I have known a lad of eighteen at the univerfity, who hath not been able to fay his catechifm; but for my own part, I always fcourged a lad fooner for miffing that than any other leffon. Believe me, child, all that gentleman's miffortunes arofe from his being educated at a public fchool." "It doth not become me," anfwered Jofeph, "to difpute anything, fir, with you, efpecially a matter of this kind; for to be fure you muft be allowed by all the world to be the beft teacher of a fchool in all our county." "Yes, that," fays Adams, "I believe, is granted me; that I may without much vanity pretend to--nay, I believe I may go to the next county too--but _gloriari non eft meum_."--"However, fir, as you are pleafed to bid me fpeak," fays Jofeph, "you know my late mafter, Sir Thomas Booby, was bred at a public fchool, and he was the fineft gentleman in all the neighbourhood. And I have often heard him fay, if he had a hundred boys he would breed them all at the fame place. It was his opinion, and I have often heard him deliver it, that a boy taken from a public fchool and carried into the world, will learn more in one year there than one of a private education will in five. He ufed to fay the fchool itfelf initiated him a great way (I remember that was his very expreffion), for great fchools are little focieties, where a boy of any obfervation may fee in epitome what he will afterwards find in the world at large."--"_Hinc illae lachrymae_: for that very reafon," quoth Adams, "I prefer a private fchool, where boys may be kept in innocence and ignorance; for, according to that fine paffage in the play of Cato, the only Englifh tragedy I ever read-- "'If knowledge of the world muft make men villains May Juba ever live in ignorance!' "Who would not rather preferve the purity of his child than wifh him to attain the whole circle of arts and fciences? which, by the bye, he may learn in the claffes of a private fchool; for I would not be vain, but I efteem myfelf to be fecond to none, _nulli fecundum_, in teaching thefe things; fo that a lad may have as much learning in a private as in a public education."--"And, with fubmiffion," anfwered Jofeph, "he may get as much vice: witnefs feveral country gentlemen, who were educated within five miles of their own houfes, and are as wicked as if they had known the world from their infancy. I remember when I was in the ftable, if a young horfe was vicious in his nature, no correction would make him otherwife: I take it to be equally the fame among men: if a boy be of a mifchievous wicked inclination, no fchool, though ever fo private, will ever make him good: on the contrary, if he be of a righteous temper, you may truft him to London, or wherever elfe you pleafe--he will be in no danger of being corrupted. Befides, I have often heard my mafter fay that the difcipline practifed in public fchools was much better than that in private."--"You talk like a jackanapes," fays Adams, "and fo did your mafter. Difcipline indeed! Becaufe one man fcourges twenty or thirty boys more in a morning than another, is he therefore a better difciplinarian? I do prefume to confer in this point with all who have taught from Chiron's time to this day; and, if I was mafter of fix boys only, I would preferve as good difcipline amongft them as the mafter of the greateft fchool in the world. I fay nothing, young man; remember I fay nothing; but if Sir Thomas himfelf had been educated nearer home, and under the tuition of fomebody--remember I name nobody--it might have been better for him:--but his father muft inftitute him in the knowledge of the world. _Nemo mortalium omnibus horis fapit_." Jofeph, feeing him run on in this manner, afked pardon many times, affuring him he had no intention to offend. "I believe you had not, child," faid he, "and I am not angry with you; but for maintaining good difcipline in a fchool; for this."--And then he ran on as before, named all the mafters who are recorded in old books, and preferred himfelf to them all. Indeed, if this good man had an enthufiafm, or what the vulgar call a blind fide, it was this: he thought a fchoolmafter the greateft character in the world, and himfelf the greateft of all fchoolmafters: neither of which points he would have given up to Alexander the Great at the head of his army. Adams continued his fubject till they came to one of the beautifulleft fpots of ground in the univerfe. It was a kind of natural amphitheatre, formed by the winding of a fmall rivulet, which was planted with thick woods, and the trees rofe gradually above each other by the natural afcent of the ground they ftood on; which afcent as they hid with their boughs, they feemed to have been difpofed by the defign of the moft fkilful planter. The foil was fpread with a verdure which no paint could imitate; and the whole place might have raifed romantic ideas in elder minds than thofe of Jofeph and Fanny, without the affiftance of love. Here they arrived about noon, and Jofeph propofed to Adams that they fhould reft awhile in this delightful place, and refrefh themfelves with fome provifions which the good-nature of Mrs Wilfon had provided them with. Adams made no objection to the propofal; fo down they fat, and, pulling out a cold fowl and a bottle of wine, they made a repaft with a cheerfulnefs which might have attracted the envy of more fplendid tables. I fhould not omit that they found among their provifion a little paper containing a piece of gold, which Adams imagining had been put there by miftake, would have returned back to reftore it; but he was at laft convinced by Jofeph that Mr Wilfon had taken this handfome way of furnifhing them with a fupply for their journey, on his having related the diftrefs which they had been in, when they were relieved by the generofity of the pedlar. Adams faid he was glad to fee fuch an inftance of goodnefs, not fo much for the conveniency which it brought them as for the fake of the doer, whofe reward would be great in heaven. He likewife comforted himfelf with a reflection that he fhould fhortly have an opportunity of returning it him; for the gentleman was within a week to make a journey into Somerfetfhire, to pafs through Adams's parifh, and had faithfully promifed to call on him; a circumftance which we thought too immaterial to mention before; but which thofe who have as great an affection for that gentleman as ourfelves will rejoice at, as it may give them hopes of feeing him again. Then Jofeph made a fpeech on charity, which the reader, if he is fo difpofed, may fee in the next chapter; for we fcorn to betray him into any fuch reading, without firft giving him warning. CHAPTER VI. _Moral reflections by Jofeph Andrews; with the hunting adventure, and parfon Adams's miraculous efcape._ "I have often wondered, fir," faid Jofeph, "to obferve fo few inftances of charity among mankind; for though the goodnefs of a man's heart did not incline him to relieve the diftreffes of his fellow-creatures, methinks the defire of honour fhould move him to it. What infpires a man to build fine houfes, to purchafe fine furniture, pictures, clothes, and other things, at a great expenfe, but an ambition to be refpected more than other people? Now, would not one great act of charity, one inftance of redeeming a poor family from all the miferies of poverty, reftoring an unfortunate tradefman by a fum of money to the means of procuring a livelihood by his induftry, difcharging an undone debtor from his debts or a gaol, or any fuchlike example of goodnefs, create a man more honour and refpect than he could acquire by the fineft houfe, furniture, pictures, or clothes, that were ever beheld? For not only the object himfelf who was thus relieved, but all who heard the name of fuch a perfon, muft, I imagine, reverence him infinitely more than the poffeffor of all thofe other things; which when we fo admire, we rather praife the builder, the workman, the painter, the lace-maker, the taylor, and the reft, by whofe ingenuity they are produced, than the perfon who by his money makes them his own. For my own part, when I have waited behind my lady in a room hung with fine pictures, while I have been looking at them I have never once thought of their owner, nor hath any one elfe, as I ever obferved; for when it hath been afked whofe picture that was, it was never once anfwered the mafter's of the houfe; but Ammyconni, Paul Varnifh, Hannibal Scratchi, or Hogarthi, which I fuppofe were the names of the painters; but if it was afked--Who redeemed fuch a one out of prifon? Who lent fuch a ruined tradefman money to fet up? Who clothed that family of poor fmall children? it is very plain what muft be the anfwer. And befides, thefe great folks are miftaken if they imagine they get any honour at all by thefe means; for I do not remember I ever was with my lady at any houfe where fhe commended the houfe or furniture but I have heard her at her return home make fport and jeer at whatever fhe had before commended; and I have been told by other gentlemen in livery that it is the fame in their families: but I defy the wifeft man in the world to turn a true good action into ridicule. I defy him to do it. He who fhould endeavour it would be laughed at himfelf, inftead of making others laugh. Nobody fcarce doth any good, yet they all agree in praifing thofe who do. Indeed, it is ftrange that all men fhould confent in commending goodnefs, and no man endeavour to deferve that commendation; whilft, on the contrary, all rail at wickednefs, and all are as eager to be what they abufe. This I know not the reafon of; but it is as plain as daylight to thofe who converfe in the world, as I have done thefe three years." "Are all the great folks wicked then?" fays Fanny. "To be fure there are fome exceptions," anfwered Jofeph. "Some gentlemen of our cloth report charitable actions done by their lords and mafters; and I have heard Squire Pope, the great poet, at my lady's table, tell ftories of a man that lived at a place called Rofs, and another at the Bath, one Al--Al--I forget his name, but it is in the book of verfes. This gentleman hath built up a ftately houfe too, which the fquire likes very well; but his charity is feen farther than his houfe, though it ftands on a hill,--ay, and brings him more honour too. It was his charity that put him in the book, where the fquire fays he puts all thofe who deferve it; and to be fure, as he lives among all the great people, if there were any fuch, he would know them." This was all of Mr Jofeph Andrews's fpeech which I could get him to recollect, which I have delivered as near as was poffible in his own words, with a very fmall embellifhment. But I believe the reader hath not been a little furprized at the long filence of parfon Adams, efpecially as fo many occafions offered themfelves to exert his curiofity and obfervation. The truth is, he was faft afleep, and had fo been from the beginning of the preceding narrative; and, indeed, if the reader confiders that fo many hours had paffed fince he had clofed his eyes, he will not wonder at his repofe, though even Henley himfelf, or as great an orator (if any fuch be), had been in his roftrum or tub before him. Jofeph, who whilft he was fpeaking had continued in one attitude, with his head reclining on one fide, and his eyes caft on the ground, no fooner perceived, on looking up, the pofition of Adams, who was ftretched on his back, and fnored louder than the ufual braying of the animal with long ears, than he turned towards Fanny, and, taking her by the hand, began a dalliance, which, though confiftent with the pureft innocence and decency, neither he would have attempted nor fhe permitted before any witnefs. Whilft they amufed themfelves in this harmlefs and delightful manner they heard a pack of hounds approaching in full cry towards them, and prefently afterwards faw a hare pop forth from the wood, and, croffing the water, land within a few yards of them in the meadows. The hare was no fooner on fhore than it feated itfelf on its hinder legs, and liftened to the found of the purfuers. Fanny was wonderfully pleafed with the little wretch, and eagerly longed to have it in her arms that fhe might preferve it from the dangers which feemed to threaten it; but the rational part of the creation do not always aptly diftinguifh their friends from their foes; what wonder then if this filly creature, the moment it beheld her, fled from the friend who would have protected it, and, traverfing the meadows again, paffed the little rivulet on the oppofite fide? It was, however, fo fpent and weak, that it fell down twice or thrice in its way. This affected the tender heart of Fanny, who exclaimed, with tears in her eyes, againft the barbarity of worrying a poor innocent defencelefs animal out of its life, and putting it to the extremeft torture for diverfion. She had not much time to make reflections of this kind, for on a fudden the hounds rufhed through the wood, which refounded with their throats and the throats of their retinue, who attended on them on horfeback. The dogs now paft the rivulet, and purfued the footfteps of the hare; five horfemen attempted to leap over, three of whom fucceeded, and two were in the attempt thrown from their faddles into the water; their companions, and their own horfes too, proceeded after their fport, and left their friends and riders to invoke the affiftance of Fortune, or employ the more active means of ftrength and agility for their deliverance. Jofeph, however, was not fo unconcerned on this occafion; he left Fanny for a moment to herfelf, and ran to the gentlemen, who were immediately on their legs, fhaking their ears, and eafily, with the help of his hand, obtained the bank (for the rivulet was not at all deep); and, without ftaying to thank their kind affifter, ran dripping acrofs the meadow, calling to their brother fportfmen to ftop their horfes; but they heard them not. The hounds were now very little behind their poor reeling, ftaggering prey, which, fainting almoft at every ftep, crawled through the wood, and had almoft got round to the place where Fanny ftood, when it was overtaken by its enemies, and being driven out of the covert, was caught, and inftantly tore to pieces before Fanny's face, who was unable to affift it with any aid more powerful than pity; nor could fhe prevail on Jofeph, who had been himfelf a fportfman in his youth, to attempt anything contrary to the laws of hunting in favour of the hare, which he faid was killed fairly. The hare was caught within a yard or two of Adams, who lay afleep at fome diftance from the lovers; and the hounds, in devouring it, and pulling it backwards and forwards, had drawn it fo clofe to him, that fome of them (by miftake perhaps for the hare's fkin) laid hold of the fkirts of his caffock; others at the fame time applying their teeth to his wig, which he had with a handkerchief faftened to his head, began to pull him about; and had not the motion of his body had more effect on him than feemed to be wrought by the noife, they muft certainly have tafted his flefh, which delicious flavour might have been fatal to him; but being roufed by thefe tuggings, he inftantly awaked, and with a jerk delivering his head from his wig, he with moft admirable dexterity recovered his legs, which now feemed the only members he could entruft his fafety to. Having, therefore, efcaped likewife from at leaft a third part of his caffock, which he willingly left as his _exuviae_ or fpoils to the enemy, he fled with the utmoft fpeed he could fummon to his affiftance. Nor let this be any detraction from the bravery of his character: let the number of the enemies, and the furprize in which he was taken, be confidered; and if there be any modern fo outrageoufly brave that he cannot admit of flight in any circumftance whatever, I fay (but I whifper that foftly, and I folemnly declare without any intention of giving offence to any brave man in the nation), I fay, or rather I whifper, that he is an ignorant fellow, and hath never read Homer nor Virgil, nor knows he anything of Hector or Turnus; nay, he is unacquainted with the hiftory of fome great men living, who, though as brave as lions, ay, as tigers, have run away, the Lord knows how far, and the Lord knows why, to the furprize of their friends and the entertainment of their enemies. But if perfons of fuch heroic difpofition are a little offended at the behaviour of Adams, we affure them they fhall be as much pleafed with what we fhall immediately relate of Jofeph Andrews. The mafter of the pack was juft arrived, or, as the fportfmen call it, come in, when Adams fet out, as we have before mentioned. This gentleman was generally faid to be a great lover of humour; but, not to mince the matter, efpecially as we are upon this fubject, he was a great hunter of men; indeed, he had hitherto followed the fport only with dogs of his own fpecies; for he kept two or three couple of barking curs for that ufe only. However, as he thought he had now found a man nimble enough, he was willing to indulge himfelf with other fport, and accordingly, crying out, "Stole away," encouraged the hounds to purfue Mr Adams, fwearing it was the largeft jack-hare he ever faw; at the fame time hallooing and hooping as if a conquered foe was flying before him; in which he was imitated by thefe two or three couple of human or rather two-legged curs on horfeback which we have mentioned before. Now, thou, whoever thou art, whether a mufe, or by what other name foever thou choofeft to be called, who prefideft over biography, and haft infpired all the writers of lives in thefe our times: thou who didft infufe fuch wonderful humour into the pen of immortal Gulliver; who haft carefully guided the judgment whilft thou haft exalted the nervous manly ftyle of thy Mallet: thou who hadft no hand in that dedication and preface, or the tranflations, which thou wouldft willingly have ftruck out of the life of Cicero: laftly, thou who, without the affiftance of the leaft fpice of literature, and even againft his inclination, haft, in fome pages of his book, forced Colley Cibber to write Englifh; do thou affift me in what I find myfelf unequal to. Do thou introduce on the plain the young, the gay, the brave Jofeph Andrews, whilft men fhall view him with admiration and envy, tender virgins with love and anxious concern for his fafety. No fooner did Jofeph Andrews perceive the diftrefs of his friend, when firft the quick-fcenting dogs attacked him, than he grafped his cudgel in his right hand--a cudgel which his father had of his grandfather, to whom a mighty ftrong man of Kent had given it for a prefent in that day when he broke three heads on the ftage. It was a cudgel of mighty ftrength and wonderful art, made by one of Mr Deard's beft workmen, whom no other artificer can equal, and who hath made all thofe fticks which the beaus have lately walked with about the Park in a morning; but this was far his mafterpiece. On its head was engraved a nofe and chin, which might have been miftaken for a pair of nutcrackers. The learned have imagined it defigned to reprefent the Gorgon; but it was in fact copied from the face of a certain long Englifh baronet, of infinite wit, humour, and gravity. He did intend to have engraved here many hiftories: as the firft night of Captain B----'s play, where you would have feen critics in embroidery tranfplanted from the boxes to the pit, whofe ancient inhabitants were exalted to the galleries, where they played on catcalls. He did intend to have painted an auction room, where Mr Cock would have appeared aloft in his pulpit, trumpeting forth the praifes of a china bafin, and with aftonifhment wondering that "Nobody bids more for that fine, that fuperb--" He did intend to have engraved many other things, but was forced to leave all out for want of room. No fooner had Jofeph grafped his cudgel in his hands than lightning darted from his eyes; and the heroick youth, fwift of foot, ran with the utmoft fpeed to his friend's affiftance. He overtook him juft as Rockwood had laid hold of the fkirt of his caffock, which, being torn, hung to the ground. Reader, we would make a fimile on this occafion, but for two reafons: the firft is, it would interrupt the defcription, which fhould be rapid in this part; but that doth not weigh much, many precedents occurring for fuch an interruption: the fecond and much the greater reafon is, that we could find no fimile adequate to our purpofe: for indeed, what inftance could we bring to fet before our reader's eyes at once the idea of friendfhip, courage, youth, beauty, ftrength, and fwiftnefs? all which blazed in the perfon of Jofeph Andrews. Let thofe, therefore, that defcribe lions and tigers, and heroes fiercer than both, raife their poems or plays with the fimile of Jofeph Andrews, who is himfelf above the reach of any fimile. Now Rockwood had laid faft hold on the parfon's fkirts, and ftopt his flight; which Jofeph no fooner perceived than he levelled his cudgel at his head and laid him fprawling. Jowler and Ringwood then fell on his greatcoat, and had undoubtedly brought him to the ground, had not Jofeph, collecting all his force, given Jowler fuch a rap on the back, that, quitting his hold, he ran howling over the plain. A harder fate remained for thee, O Ringwood! Ringwood the beft hound that ever purfued a hare, who never threw his tongue but where the fcent was undoubtedly true; good at trailing, and fure in a highway; no babler, no overrunner; refpected by the whole pack, who, whenever he opened, knew the game was at hand. He fell by the ftroke of Jofeph. Thunder and Plunder, and Wonder and Blunder, were the next victims of his wrath, and meafured their lengths on the ground. Then Fairmaid, a bitch which Mr John Temple had bred up in his houfe, and fed at his own table, and lately fent the fquire fifty miles for a prefent, ran fiercely at Jofeph and bit him by the leg: no dog was ever fiercer than fhe, being defcended from an Amazonian breed, and had worried bulls in her own country, but now waged an unequal fight, and had fhared the fate of thofe we have mentioned before, had not Diana (the reader may believe it or not if he pleafes) in that inftant interpofed, and, in the fhape of the huntfman, fnatched her favourite up in her arms. The parfon now faced about, and with his crabftick felled many to the earth, and fcattered others, till he was attacked by Caefar and pulled to the ground. Then Jofeph flew to his refcue, and with fuch might fell on the victor, that, O eternal blot to his name! Caefar ran yelping away. The battle now raged with the moft dreadful violence, when, lo! the huntfman, a man of years and dignity, lifted his voice, and called his hounds from the fight, telling them, in a language they underftood, that it was in vain to contend longer, for that fate had decreed the victory to their enemies. Thus far the mufe hath with her ufual dignity related this prodigious battle, a battle we apprehend never equalled by any poet, romance or life writer whatever, and, having brought it to a conclufion, fhe ceafed; we fhall therefore proceed in our ordinary ftyle with the continuation of this hiftory. The fquire and his companions, whom the figure of Adams and the gallantry of Jofeph had at firft thrown into a violent fit of laughter, and who had hitherto beheld the engagement with more delight than any chafe, fhooting-match, race, cock-fighting, bull or bear baiting, had ever given them, began now to apprehend the danger of their hounds, many of which lay fprawling in the fields. The fquire, therefore, having firft called his friends about him, as guards for fafety of his perfon, rode manfully up to the combatants, and, fummoning all the terror he was mafter of into his countenance, demanded with an authoritative voice of Jofeph what he meant by affaulting his dogs in that manner? Jofeph anfwered, with great intrepidity, that they had firft fallen on his friend; and if they had belonged to the greateft man in the kingdom, he would have treated them in the fame way; for, whilft his veins contained a fingle drop of blood, he would not ftand idle by and fee that gentleman (pointing to Adams) abufed either by man or beaft; and, having fo faid, both he and Adams brandifhed their wooden weapons, and put themfelves into fuch a pofture, that the fquire and his company thought proper to preponderate before they offered to revenge the caufe of their four-footed allies. At this inftant Fanny, whom the apprehenfion of Jofeph's danger had alarmed fo much that, forgetting her own, fhe had made the utmoft expedition, came up. The fquire and all the horfemen were fo furprized with her beauty, that they immediately fixed both their eyes and thoughts folely on her, every one declaring he had never feen fo charming a creature. Neither mirth nor anger engaged them a moment longer, but all fat in filent amaze. The huntfman only was free from her attraction, who was bufy in cutting the ears of the dogs, and endeavouring to recover them to life; in which he fucceeded fo well, that only two of no great note remained flaughtered on the field of action. Upon this the huntfman declared, "'Twas well it was no worfe; for his part he could not blame the gentleman, and wondered his mafter would encourage the dogs to hunt Chriftians; that it was the fureft way to fpoil them, to make them follow vermin inftead of fticking to a hare." The fquire, being informed of the little mifchief that had been done, and perhaps having more mifchief of another kind in his head, accofted Mr Adams with a more favourable afpect than before: he told him he was forry for what had happened; that he had endeavoured all he could to prevent it the moment he was acquainted with his cloth, and greatly commended the courage of his fervant, for fo he imagined Jofeph to be. He then invited Mr Adams to dinner, and defired the young woman might come with him. Adams refufed a long while; but the invitation was repeated with fo much earneftnefs and courtefy, that at length he was forced to accept it. His wig and hat, and other fpoils of the field, being gathered together by Jofeph (for otherwife probably they would have been forgotten), he put himfelf into the beft order he could; and then the horfe and foot moved forward in the fame pace towards the fquire's houfe, which ftood at a very little diftance. Whilft they were on the road the lovely Fanny attracted the eyes of all: they endeavoured to outvie one another in encomiums on her beauty; which the reader will pardon my not relating, as they had not anything new or uncommon in them: fo muft he likewife my not fetting down the many curious jefts which were made on Adams; fome of them declaring that parfon-hunting was the beft fport in the world; others commending his ftanding at bay, which they faid he had done as well as any badger; with fuch like merriment, which, though it would ill become the dignity of this hiftory, afforded much laughter and diverfion to the fquire and his facetious companions. CHAPTER VII. _A fcene of roafting, very nicely adapted to the prefent tafte and times._ They arrived at the fquire's houfe juft as his dinner was ready. A little difpute arofe on the account of Fanny, whom the fquire, who was a bachelor, was defirous to place at his own table; but fhe would not confent, nor would Mr Adams permit her to be parted from Jofeph; fo that fhe was at length with him configned over to the kitchen, where the fervants were ordered to make him drunk; a favour which was likewife intended for Adams; which defign being executed, the fquire thought he fhould eafily accomplifh what he had when he firft faw her intended to perpetrate with Fanny. It may not be improper, before we proceed farther, to open a little the character of this gentleman, and that of his friends. The mafter of this houfe, then, was a man of a very confiderable fortune; a bachelor, as we have faid, and about forty years of age: he had been educated (if we may ufe the expreffion) in the country, and at his own home, under the care of his mother, and a tutor who had orders never to correct him, nor to compel him to learn more than he liked, which it feems was very little, and that only in his childhood; for from the age of fifteen he addicted himfelf entirely to hunting and other rural amufements, for which his mother took care to equip him with horfes, hounds, and all other neceffaries; and his tutor, endeavouring to ingratiate himfelf with his young pupil, who would, he knew, be able handfomely to provide for him, became his companion, not only at thefe exercifes, but likewife over a bottle, which the young fquire had a very early relifh for. At the age of twenty his mother began to think fhe had not fulfilled the duty of a parent; fhe therefore refolved to perfuade her fon, if poffible, to that which fhe imagined would well fupply all that he might have learned at a public fchool or univerfity--this is what they commonly call travelling; which, with the help of the tutor, who was fixed on to attend him, fhe eafily fucceeded in. He made in three years the tour of Europe, as they term it, and returned home well furnifhed with French clothes, phrafes, and fervants, with a hearty contempt for his own country; efpecially what had any favour of the plain fpirit and honefty of our anceftors. His mother greatly applauded herfelf at his return. And now, being mafter of his own fortune, he foon procured himfelf a feat in Parliament, and was in the common opinion one of the fineft gentlemen of his age: but what diftinguifhed him chiefly was a ftrange delight which he took in everything which is ridiculous, odious, and abfurd in his own fpecies; fo that he never chofe a companion without one or more of thefe ingredients, and thofe who were marked by nature in the moft eminent degree with them were moft his favourites. If he ever found a man who either had not, or endeavoured to conceal, thefe imperfections, he took great pleafure in inventing methods of forcing him into abfurdities which were not natural to him, or in drawing forth and expofing thofe that were; for which purpofe he was always provided with a fet of fellows, whom we have before called curs, and who did, indeed, no great honour to the canine kind; their bufinefs was to hunt out and difplay everything that had any favour of the above-mentioned qualities, and efpecially in the graveft and beft characters; but if they failed in their fearch, they were to turn even virtue and wifdom themfelves into ridicule, for the diverfion of their mafter and feeder. The gentlemen of curlike difpofition who were now at his houfe, and whom he had brought with him from London, were, an old half-pay officer, a player, a dull poet, a quack-doctor, a fcraping fiddler, and a lame German dancing-mafter. As foon as dinner was ferved, while Mr Adams was faying grace, the captain conveyed his chair from behind him; fo that when he endeavoured to feat himfelf he fell down on the ground, and this completed joke the firft, to the great entertainment of the whole company. The fecond joke was performed by the poet, who fat next him on the other fide, and took an opportunity, while poor Adams was refpectfully drinking to the mafter of the houfe, to overturn a plate of foup into his breeches; which, with the many apologies he made, and the parfon's gentle anfwers, caufed much mirth in the company. Joke the third was ferved up by one of the waiting-men, who had been ordered to convey a quantity of gin into Mr Adams's ale, which he declaring to be the beft liquor he ever drank, but rather too rich of the malt, contributed again to their laughter. Mr Adams, from whom we had moft of this relation, could not recollect all the jefts of this kind practifed on him, which the inoffenfive difpofition of his own heart made him flow in difcovering; and indeed, had it not been for the information which we received from a fervant of the family, this part of our hiftory, which we take to be none of the leaft curious, muft have been deplorably imperfect; though we muft own it probable that fome more jokes were (as they call it) cracked during their dinner; but we have by no means been able to come at the knowledge of them. When dinner was removed, the poet began to repeat fome verfes, which, he faid, were made extempore. The following is a copy of them, procured with the greateft difficulty:-- _An extempore Poem on parfon Adams._ Did ever mortal fuch a parfon view? His caffock old, his wig not over-new, Well might the hounds have him for fox miftaken, In fmell more like to that than rufty bacon[A]; But would it not make any mortal ftare To fee this parfon taken for a hare? Could Phoebus err thus groffly, even he For a good player might have taken thee. [A] All hounds that will hunt fox or other vermin will hunt a piece of rufty bacon trailed on the ground. At which words the bard whipt off the player's wig, and received the approbation of the company, rather perhaps for the dexterity of his hand than his head. The player, inftead of retorting the jeft on the poet, began to difplay his talents on the fame fubject. He repeated many fcraps of wit out of plays, reflecting on the whole body of the clergy, which were received with great acclamations by all prefent. It was now the dancing-mafter's turn to exhibit his talents; he therefore, addreffing himfelf to Adams in broken Englifh, told him, "He was a man ver well made for de dance, and he fuppofe by his walk dat he had learn of fome great mafter." He faid, "It was ver pretty quality in clergyman to dance;" and concluded with defiring him to dance a minuet, telling him, "his caffock would ferve for petticoats; and that he would himfelf be his partner." At which words, without waiting for an anfwer, he pulled out his gloves, and the fiddler was preparing his fiddle. The company all offered the dancing-mafter wagers that the parfon out-danced him, which he refufed, faying "he believed fo too, for he had never feen any man in his life who looked de dance fo well as de gentleman:" he then ftepped forwards to take Adams by the hand, which the latter haftily withdrew, and, at the fame time clenching his fift, advifed him not to carry the jeft too far, for he would not endure being put upon. The dancing-mafter no fooner faw the fift than he prudently retired out of its reach, and ftood aloof, mimicking Adams, whofe eyes were fixed on him, not gueffing what he was at, but to avoid his laying hold on him, which he had once attempted. In the meanwhile, the captain, perceiving an opportunity, pinned a cracker or devil to the caffock, and then lighted it with their little fmoking-candle. Adams, being a ftranger to this fport, and believing he had been blown up in reality, ftarted from his chair, and jumped about the room, to the infinite joy of the beholders, who declared he was the beft dancer in the univerfe. As foon as the devil had done tormenting him, and he had a little recovered his confufion, he returned to the table, ftanding up in the pofture of one who intended to make a fpeech. They all cried out, "Hear him, hear him;" and he then fpoke in the following manner: "Sir, I am forry to fee one to whom Providence hath been fo bountiful in beftowing his favours make fo ill and ungrateful a return for them; for, though you have not infulted me yourfelf, it is vifible you have delighted in thofe that do it, nor have once difcouraged the many rudeneffes which have been fhown towards me; indeed, towards yourfelf, if you rightly underftood them; for I am your gueft, and by the laws of hofpitality entitled to your protection. One gentleman had thought proper to produce fome poetry upon me, of which I fhall only fay, that I had rather be the fubject than the compofer. He hath pleafed to treat me with difrefpect as a parfon. I apprehend my order is not the fubject of fcorn, nor that I can become fo, unlefs by being a difgrace to it, which I hope poverty will never be called. Another gentleman, indeed, hath repeated fome fentences, where the order itfelf is mentioned with contempt. He fays they are taken from plays. I am fure fuch plays are a fcandal to the government which permits them, and curfed will be the nation where they are reprefented. How others have treated me I need not obferve; they themfelves, when they reflect, muft allow the behaviour to be as improper to my years as to my cloth. You found me, fir, travelling with two of my parifhioners (I omit your hounds falling on me; for I have quite forgiven it, whether it proceeded from the wantonnefs or negligence of the huntfman): my appearance might very well perfuade you that your invitation was an act of charity, though in reality we were well provided; yes, fir, if we had had an hundred miles to travel, we had fufficient to bear our expenfes in a noble manner." (At which words he produced the half-guinea which was found in the bafket.) "I do not fhow you this out of oftentation of riches, but to convince you I fpeak truth. Your feating me at your table was an honour which I did not ambitioufly affect. When I was here, I endeavoured to behave towards you with the utmoft refpect; if I have failed, it was not with defign; nor could I, certainly, fo far be guilty as to deferve the infults I have fuffered. If they were meant, therefore, either to my order or my poverty (and you fee I am not very poor), the fhame doth not lie at my door, and I heartily pray that the fin may be averted from yours." He thus finifhed, and received a general clap from the whole company. Then the gentleman of the houfe told him, "He was forry for what had happened; that he could not accufe him of any fhare in it; that the verfes were, as himfelf had well obferved, fo bad, that he might eafily anfwer them; and for the ferpent, it was undoubtedly a very great affront done him by the dancing-mafter, for which, if he well thrafhed him, as he deferved, he fhould be very much pleafed to fee it" (in which, probably, he fpoke truth). Adams anfwered, "Whoever had done it, it was not his profeffion to punifh him that way; but for the perfon whom he had accufed, I am a witnefs," fays he, "of his innocence; for I had my eye on him all the while. Whoever he was, God forgive him, and beftow on him a little more fenfe as well as humanity." The captain anfwered with a furly look and accent, "That he hoped he did not mean to reflect upon him; d--n him, he had as much imanity as another, and, if any man faid he had not, he would convince him of his miftake by cutting his throat." Adams, fmiling, faid, "He believed he had fpoke right by accident." To which the captain returned, "What do you mean by my fpeaking right? If you was not a parfon, I would not take thefe words; but your gown protects you. If any man who wears a fword had faid fo much, I had pulled him by the nofe before this." Adams replied, "If he attempted any rudenefs to his perfon, he would not find any protection for himfelf in his gown;" and, clenching his fift, declared "he had thrafhed many a ftouter man." The gentleman did all he could to encourage this warlike difpofition in Adams, and was in hopes to have produced a battle, but he was difappointed; for the captain made no other anfwer than, "It is very well you are a parfon;" and fo, drinking off a bumper to old mother Church, ended the difpute. Then the doctor, who had hitherto been filent, and who was the graveft but moft mifchievous dog of all, in a very pompous fpeech highly applauded what Adams had faid, and as much difcommended the behaviour to him. He proceeded to encomiums on the Church and poverty; and, laftly, recommended forgivenefs of what had paffed to Adams, who immediately anfwered, "That everything was forgiven;" and in the warmth of his goodnefs he filled a bumper of ftrong beer (a liquor he preferred to wine), and drank a health to the whole company, fhaking the captain and the poet heartily by the hand, and addreffing himfelf with great refpect to the doctor; who, indeed, had not laughed outwardly at anything that paft, as he had a perfect command of his mufcles, and could laugh inwardly without betraying the leaft fymptoms in his countenance. The doctor now began a fecond formal fpeech, in which he declaimed againft all levity of converfation, and what is ufually called mirth. He faid, "There were amufements fitted for perfons of all ages and degrees, from the rattle to the difcuffing a point of philofophy; and that men difcovered themfelves in nothing more than in the choice of their amufements; for," fays he, "as it muft greatly raife our expectation of the future conduct in life of boys whom in their tender years we perceive, inftead of taw or balls, or other childifh playthings, to chufe, at their leifure hours, to exercife their genius in contentions of wit, learning, and fuch like; fo muft it infpire one with equal contempt of a man, if we fhould difcover him playing at taw or other childifh play." Adams highly commended the doctor's opinion, and faid, "He had often wondered at fome paffages in ancient authors, where Scipio, Laelius, and other great men were reprefented to have paffed many hours in amufements of the moft trifling kind." The doctor replied, "He had by him an old Greek manufcript where a favourite diverfion of Socrates was recorded." "Ay!" fays the parfon eagerly; "I fhould be moft infinitely obliged to you for the favour of perufing it." The doctor promifed to fend it him, and farther faid, "That he believed he could defcribe it. I think," fays he, "as near as I can remember, it was this: there was a throne erected, on one fide of which fat a king and on the other a queen, with their guards and attendants ranged on both fides; to them was introduced an ambaffador, which part Socrates always ufed to perform himfelf; and when he was led up to the footfteps of the throne he addreffed himfelf to the monarchs in fome grave fpeech, full of virtue, and goodnefs, and morality, and fuch like. After which, he was feated between the king and queen, and royally entertained. This I think was the chief part. Perhaps I may have forgot fome particulars; for it is long fince I read it." Adams faid, "It was, indeed, a diverfion worthy the relaxation of fo great a man; and thought fomething refembling it fhould be inftituted among our great men, inftead of cards and other idle paftime, in which, he was informed, they trifled away too much of their lives." He added, "The Chriftian religion was a nobler fubject for thefe fpeeches than any Socrates could have invented." The gentleman of the houfe approved what Mr Adams faid, and declared "he was refolved to perform the ceremony this very evening." To which the doctor objected, as no one was prepared with a fpeech, "unlefs," faid he (turning to Adams with a gravity of countenance which would have deceived a more knowing man), "you have a fermon about you, doctor." "Sir," faid Adams, "I never travel without one, for fear of what may happen." He was eafily prevailed on by his worthy friend, as he now called the doctor, to undertake the part of the ambaffador; fo that the gentleman fent immediate orders to have the throne erected, which was performed before they had drank two bottles; and, perhaps, the reader will hereafter have no great reafon to admire the nimblenefs of the fervants. Indeed, to confefs the truth, the throne was no more than this: there was a great tub of water provided, on each fide of which were placed two ftools raifed higher than the furface of the tub, and over the whole was laid a blanket; on thefe ftools were placed the king and queen, namely, the mafter of the houfe and the captain. And now the ambaffador was introduced between the poet and the doctor; who, having read his fermon, to the great entertainment of all prefent, was led up to his place and feated between their majefties. They immediately rofe up, when the blanket, wanting its fupports at either end, gave way, and foufed Adams over head and ears in the water. The captain made his efcape, but, unluckily, the gentleman himfelf not being as nimble as he ought, Adams caught hold of him before he defcended from his throne, and pulled him in with him, to the entire fecret fatiffaction of all the company. Adams, after ducking the fquire twice or thrice, leapt out of the tub, and looked fharp for the doctor, whom he would certainly have conveyed to the fame place of honour; but he had wifely withdrawn: he then fearched for his crabftick, and having found that, as well as his fellow travellers, he declared he would not ftay a moment longer in fuch a houfe. He then departed, without taking leave of his hoft, whom he had exacted a more fevere revenge on than he intended; for, as he did not ufe fufficient care to dry himfelf in time, he caught a cold by the accident which threw him into a fever that had like to have coft him his life. CHAPTER VIII. _Which fome readers will think too fhort and others too long._ Adams, and Jofeph, who was no lefs enraged than his friend at the treatment he met with, went out with their fticks in their hands, and carried off Fanny, notwithftanding the oppofition of the fervants, who did all, without proceeding to violence, in their power to detain them. They walked as faft as they could, not fo much from any apprehenfion of being purfued as that Mr Adams might, by exercife, prevent any harm from the water. The gentleman, who had given fuch orders to his fervants concerning Fanny that he did not in the leaft fear her getting away, no fooner heard that fhe was gone, than he began to rave, and immediately defpatched feveral with orders either to bring her back or never return. The poet, the player, and all but the dancing-mafter and doctor, went on this errand. The night was very dark in which our friends began their journey; however, they made fuch expedition, that they foon arrived at an inn which was at feven miles' diftance. Here they unanimoufly confented to pafs the evening, Mr Adams being now as dry as he was before he had fet out on his embaffy. This inn, which indeed we might call an ale-houfe, had not the words, The New Inn, been writ on the fign, afforded them no better provifion than bread and cheefe and ale; on which, however, they made a very comfortable meal; for hunger is better than a French cook. They had no fooner fupped, than Adams, returning thanks to the Almighty for his food, declared he had eat his homely commons with much greater fatiffaction than his fplendid dinner; and expreffed great contempt for the folly of mankind, who facrificed their hopes of heaven to the acquifition of vaft wealth, fince fo much comfort was to be found in the humbleft ftate and the loweft provifion. "Very true, fir," fays a grave man who fat fmoaking his pipe by the fire, and who was a traveller as well as himfelf. "I have often been as much furprized as you are, when I confider the value which mankind in general fet on riches, fince every day's experience fhows us how little is in their power; for what, indeed, truly defirable, can they beftow on us? Can they give beauty to the deformed, ftrength to the weak, or health to the infirm? Surely if they could we fhould not fee fo many ill-favoured faces haunting the affemblies of the great, nor would fuch numbers of feeble wretches languifh in their coaches and palaces. No, not the wealth of a kingdom can purchafe any paint to drefs pale Uglinefs in the bloom of that young maiden, nor any drugs to equip Difeafe with the vigour of that young man. Do not riches bring us to folicitude inftead of reft, envy inftead of affection, and danger inftead of fafety? Can they prolong their own poffeffion, or lengthen his days who enjoys them? So far otherwife, that the floth, the luxury, the care which attend them, fhorten the lives of millions, and bring them with pain and mifery to an untimely grave. Where, then, is their value if they can neither embellifh nor ftrengthen our forms, fweeten nor prolong our lives?--Again: Can they adorn the mind more than the body? Do they not rather fwell the heart with vanity, puff up the cheeks with pride, fhut our ears to every call of virtue, and our bowels to every motive of compaffion?" "Give me your hand, brother," faid Adams, in a rapture, "for I fuppofe you are a clergyman."--"No, truly," anfwered the other (indeed, he was a prieft of the Church of Rome; but thofe who underftand our laws will not wonder he was not over-ready to own it).--"Whatever you are," cries Adams, "you have fpoken my fentiments: I believe I have preached every fyllable of your fpeech twenty times over; for it hath always appeared to me eafier for a cable-rope (which by the way is the true rendering of that word we have tranflated camel) to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of heaven."--"That, fir," faid the other, "will be eafily granted you by divines, and is deplorably true; but as the profpect of our good at a diftance doth not fo forcibly affect us, it might be of fome fervice to mankind to be made thoroughly fenfible--which I think they might be with very little ferious attention--that even the bleffings of this world are not to be purchafed with riches; a doctrine, in my opinion, not only metaphyfically, but, if I may fo fay, mathematically demonftrable; and which I have been always fo perfectly convinced of that I have a contempt for nothing fo much as for gold." Adams now began a long difcourfe: but as moft which he faid occurs among many authors who have treated this fubject, I fhall omit inferting it. During its continuance Jofeph and Fanny retired to reft, and the hoft likewife left the room. When the Englifh parfon had concluded, the Romifh refumed the difcourfe, which he continued with great bitternefs and invective; and at laft ended by defiring Adams to lend him eighteen-pence to pay his reckoning; promifing, if he never paid him, he might be affured of his prayers. The good man anfwered that eighteen-pence would be too little to carry him any very long journey; that he had half a guinea in his pocket, which he would divide with him. He then fell to fearching his pockets, but could find no money; for indeed the company with whom he dined had paffed one jeft upon him which we did not then enumerate, and had picked his pocket of all that treafure which he had fo oftentatioufly produced. "Blefs me!" cried Adams, "I have certainly loft it; I can never have fpent it. Sir, as I am a Chriftian, I had a whole half-guinea in my pocket this morning, and have not now a fingle halfpenny of it left. Sure the devil muft have taken it from me!"--"Sir," anfwered the prieft, fmiling, "you need make no excufes; if you are not willing to lend me the money, I am contented."--"Sir," cries Adams, "if I had the greateft fum in the world--aye, if I had ten pounds about me--I would beftow it all to refcue any Chriftian from diftrefs. I am more vexed at my lofs on your account than my own. Was ever anything fo unlucky? Becaufe I have no money in my pocket I fhall be fufpected to be no Chriftian."--"I am more unlucky," quoth the other, "if you are as generous as you fay; for really a crown would have made me happy, and conveyed me in plenty to the place I am going, which is not above twenty miles off, and where I can arrive by to-morrow night. I affure you I am not accuftomed to travel pennylefs. I am but juft arrived in England; and we were forced by a ftorm in our paffage to throw all we had overboard. I don't fufpect but this fellow will take my word for the trifle I owe him; but I hate to appear fo mean as to confefs myfelf without a fhilling to fuch people; for thefe, and indeed too many others, know little difference in their eftimation between a beggar and a thief." However, he thought he fhould deal better with the hoft that evening than the next morning: he therefore refolved to fet out immediately, notwithftanding the darknefs; and accordingly, as foon as the hoft returned, he communicated to him the fituation of his affairs; upon which the hoft, fcratching his head, anfwered, "Why, I do not know, mafter; if it be fo, and you have no money, I muft truft, I think, though I had rather always have ready money if I could; but, marry, you look like fo honeft a gentleman that I don't fear your paying me if it was twenty times as much." The prieft made no reply, but, taking leave of him and Adams as faft as he could, not without confufion, and perhaps with fome diftruft of Adams's fincerity, departed. He was no fooner gone than the hoft fell a-fhaking his head, and declared, if he had fufpected the fellow had no money, he would not have drawn him a fingle drop of drink, faying he defpaired of ever feeing his face again, for that he looked like a confounded rogue. "Rabbit the fellow," cries he, "I thought, by his talking fo much about riches, that he had a hundred pounds at leaft in his pocket." Adams chid him for his fufpicions, which, he faid, were not becoming a Chriftian; and then, without reflecting on his lofs, or confidering how he himfelf fhould depart in the morning, he retired to a very homely bed, as his companions had before; however, health and fatigue gave them a fweeter repofe than is often in the power of velvet and down to beftow. CHAPTER IX. _Containing as furprizing and bloody adventures as can be found in this or perhaps any other authentic hiftory._ It was almoft morning when Jofeph Andrews, whofe eyes the thoughts of his dear Fanny had opened, as he lay fondly meditating on that lovely creature, heard a violent knocking at the door over which he lay. He prefently jumped out of bed, and, opening the window, was afked if there were no travellers in the houfe? and prefently, by another voice, if two men and a woman had not taken up there their lodging that night? Though he knew not the voices, he began to entertain a fufpicion of the truth--for indeed he had received fome information from one of the fervants of the fquire's houfe of his defign--and anfwered in the negative. One of the fervants, who knew the hoft well, called out to him by his name juft as he had opened another window, and afked him the fame queftion; to which he anfwered in the affirmative. O ho! faid another, have we found you? and ordered the hoft to come down and open his door. Fanny, who was as wakeful as Jofeph, no fooner heard all this than fhe leaped from her bed, and, haftily putting on her gown and petticoats, ran as faft as poffible to Jofeph's room, who then was almoft dreft. He immediately let her in, and, embracing her with the moft paffionate tendernefs, bid her fear nothing, for he would die in her defence. "Is that a reafon why I fhould not fear," fays fhe, "when I fhould lofe what is dearer to me than the whole world?" Jofeph, then kiffing her hand, faid, "He could almoft thank the occafion which had extorted from her a tendernefs fhe would never indulge him with before." He then ran and waked his bedfellow Adams, who was yet faft afleep, notwithftanding many calls from Jofeph; but was no fooner made fenfible of their danger than he leaped from his bed, without confidering the prefence of Fanny, who haftily turned her face from him, and enjoyed a double benefit from the dark, which, as it would have prevented any offence, to an innocence lefs pure, or a modefty lefs delicate, fo it concealed even thofe blufhes which were raifed in her. Adams had foon put on all his clothes but his breeches, which, in the hurry, he forgot; however, they were pretty well fupplied by the length of his other garments; and now, the houfe-door being opened, the captain, the poet, the player, and three fervants came in. The captain told the hoft that two fellows, who were in his houfe, had run away with a young woman, and defired to know in which room fhe lay. The hoft, who prefently believed the ftory, directed them, and inftantly the captain and poet, juftling one another, ran up. The poet, who was the nimbleft, entering the chamber firft, fearched the bed, and every other part, but to no purpofe; the bird was flown, as the impatient reader, who might otherwife have been in pain for her, was before advertifed. They then enquired where the men lay, and were approaching the chamber, when Jofeph roared out, in a loud voice, that he would fhoot the firft man who offered to attack the door. The captain enquired what fire-arms they had; to which the hoft anfwered, he believed they had none; nay, he was almoft convinced of it, for he had heard one afk the other in the evening what they fhould have done if they had been overtaken, when they had no arms; to which the other anfwered, they would have defended themfelves with their fticks as long as they were able, and God would affift a juft caufe. This fatiffied the captain, but not the poet, who prudently retreated downftairs, faying, it was his bufinefs to record great actions, and not to do them. The captain was no fooner well fatiffied that there were no fire-arms than, bidding defiance to gunpowder, and fwearing he loved the fmell of it, he ordered the fervants to follow him, and, marching boldly up, immediately attempted to force the door, which the fervants foon helped him to accomplifh. When it was opened, they difcovered the enemy drawn up three deep; Adams in the front, and Fanny in the rear. The captain told Adams that if they would go all back to the houfe again they fhould be civilly treated; but unlefs they confented he had orders to carry the young lady with him, whom there was great reafon to believe they had ftolen from her parents; for, notwithftanding her difguife, her air, which fhe could not conceal, fufficiently difcovered her birth to be infinitely fuperior to theirs. Fanny, burfting into tears, folemnly affured him he was miftaken; that fhe was a poor helplefs foundling, and had no relation in the world which fhe knew of; and, throwing herfelf on her knees, begged that he would not attempt to take her from her friends, who, fhe was convinced, would die before they would lofe her; which Adams confirmed with words not far from amounting to an oath. The captain fwore he had no leifure to talk, and, bidding them thank themfelves for what happened, he ordered the fervants to fall on, at the fame time endeavouring to pafs by Adams, in order to lay hold on Fanny; but the parfon, interrupting him, received a blow from one of them, which, without confidering whence it came, he returned to the captain, and gave him fo dexterous a knock in that part of the ftomach which is vulgarly called the pit, that he ftaggered fome paces backwards. The captain, who was not accuftomed to this kind of play, and who wifely apprehended the confequence of fuch another blow, two of them feeming to him equal to a thruft through the body, drew forth his hanger, as Adams approached him, and was levelling a blow at his head, which would probably have filenced the preacher for ever, had not Jofeph in that inftant lifted up a certain huge ftone pot of the chamber with one hand, which fix beaus could not have lifted with both, and difcharged it, together with the contents, full in the captain's face. The uplifted hanger dropped from his hand, and he fell proftrated on the floor with a lumpifh noife, and his halfpence rattled in his pocket; the red liquor which his veins contained, and the white liquor which the pot contained, ran in one ftream down his face and his clothes. Nor had Adams quite efcaped, fome of the water having in its paffage fhed its honours on his head, and began to trickle down the wrinkles or rather furrows of his cheeks, when one of the fervants, fnatching a mop out of a pail of water, which had already done its duty in wafhing the houfe, pufhed it in the parfon's face; yet could not he bear him down, for the parfon, wrefting the mop from the fellow with one hand, with the other brought his enemy as low as the earth, having given him a ftroke over that part of the face where, in fome men of pleafure, the natural and artificial nofes are conjoined. Hitherto, Fortune feemed to incline the victory on the travellers' fide, when, according to her cuftom, fhe began to fhow the ficklenefs of her difpofition; for now the hoft, entering the field, or rather chamber of battle, flew directly at Jofeph, and, darting his head into his ftomach (for he was a ftout fellow and an expert boxer), almoft ftaggered him: but Jofeph, ftepping one leg back, did with his left hand fo chuck him under the chin that he reeled. The youth was purfuing his blow with his right hand when he received from one of the fervants fuch a ftroke with a cudgel on his temples, that it inftantly deprived him of fenfe, and he meafured his length on the ground. Fanny rent the air with her cries, and Adams was coming to the affiftance of Jofeph; but the two ferving-men and the hoft now fell on him, and foon fubdued him, though he fought like a madman, and looked fo black with the impreffions he had received from the mop, that Don Quixote would certainly have taken him for an inchanted Moor. But now follows the moft tragical part; for the captain was rifen again, and, feeing Jofeph on the floor, and Adams fecured, he inftantly laid hold on Fanny, and, with the affiftance of the poet and player, who, hearing the battle was over, were now come up, dragged her, crying and tearing her hair, from the fight of her Jofeph, and, with a perfect deafnefs to all her entreaties, carried her downftairs by violence, and faftened her on the player's horfe; and the captain, mounting his own, and leading that on which this poor miferable wretch was, departed, without any more confideration of her cries than a butcher hath of thofe of a lamb; for indeed his thoughts were entertained only with the degree of favour which he promifed himfelf from the fquire on the fuccefs of this adventure. The fervants, who were ordered to fecure Adams and Jofeph as fafe as poffible, that the fquire might receive no interruption to his defign on poor Fanny, immediately, by the poet's advice, tied Adams to one of the bed-pofts, as they did Jofeph on the other fide, as foon as they could bring him to himfelf; and then, leaving them together, back to back, and defiring the hoft not to fet them at liberty, nor to go near them, till he had further orders, they departed towards their mafter; but happened to take a different road from that which the captain had fallen into. CHAPTER X. _A difcourfe between the poet and the player; of no other ufe in this hiftory but to divert the reader._ Before we proceed any farther in this tragedy we fhall leave Mr Jofeph and Mr Adams to themfelves, and imitate the wife conductors of the ftage, who in the midft of a grave action entertain you with fome excellent piece of fatire or humour called a dance. Which piece, indeed, is therefore danced, and not fpoke, as it is delivered to the audience by perfons whofe thinking faculty is by moft people held to lie in their heels; and to whom, as well as heroes, who think with their hands, Nature hath only given heads for the fake of conformity, and as they are of ufe in dancing, to hang their hats on. The poet, addreffing the player, proceeded thus, "As I was faying" (for they had been at this difcourfe all the time of the engagement above-ftairs), "the reafon you have no good new plays is evident; it is from your difcouragement of authors. Gentlemen will not write, fir, they will not write, without the expectation of fame or profit, or perhaps both. Plays are like trees, which will not grow without nourifhment; but like mufhrooms, they fhoot up fpontaneoufly, as it were, in a rich foil. The mufes, like vines, may be pruned, but not with a hatchet. The town, like a peevifh child, knows not what it defires, and is always beft pleafed with a rattle. A farce-writer hath indeed fome chance for fuccefs: but they have loft all tafte for the fublime. Though I believe one reafon of their depravity is the badnefs of the actors. If a man writes like an angel, fir, thofe fellows know not how to give a fentiment utterance."--"Not fo faft," fays the player: "the modern actors are as good at leaft as their authors, nay, they come nearer their illuftrious predeceffors; and I expect a Booth on the ftage again, fooner than a Shakefpear or an Otway; and indeed I may turn your obfervation againft you, and with truth fay, that the reafon no authors are encouraged is becaufe we have no good new plays."--"I have not affirmed the contrary," faid the poet; "but I am furprized you grow fo warm; you cannot imagine yourfelf interefted in this difpute; I hope you have a better opinion of my tafte than to apprehend I fquinted at yourfelf. No, fir, if we had fix fuch actors as you, we fhould foon rival the Bettertons and Sandfords of former times; for, without a compliment to you, I think it impoffible for any one to have excelled you in moft of your parts. Nay, it is folemn truth, and I have heard many, and all great judges, exprefs as much; and, you will pardon me if I tell you, I think every time I have feen you lately you have conftantly acquired fome new excellence, like a fnowball. You have deceived me in my eftimation of perfection, and have outdone what I thought inimitable."--"You are as little interefted," anfwered the player, "in what I have faid of other poets; for d--n me if there are not many ftrokes, ay, whole fcenes, in your laft tragedy, which at leaft equal Shakefpear. There is a delicacy of fentiment, a dignity of expreffion in it, which I will own many of our gentlemen did not do adequate juftice to. To confefs the truth, they are bad enough, and I pity an author who is prefent at the murder of his works."--"Nay, it is but feldom that it can happen," returned the poet; "the works of moft modern authors, like dead-born children, cannot be murdered. It is fuch wretched half-begotten, half-writ, lifelefs, fpiritlefs, low, grovelling ftuff, that I almoft pity the actor who is obliged to get it by heart, which muft be almoft as difficult to remember as words in a language you don't underftand."--"I am fure," faid the player, "if the fentences have little meaning when they are writ, when they are fpoken they have lefs. I know fcarce one who ever lays an emphafis right, and much lefs adapts his action to his character. I have feen a tender lover in an attitude of fighting with his miftrefs, and a brave hero fuing to his enemy with his fword in his hand. I don't care to abufe my profeffion, but rot me if in my heart I am not inclined to the poet's fide."--"It is rather generous in you than juft," faid the poet; "and, though I hate to fpeak ill of any perfon's production--nay, I never do it, nor will--but yet, to do juftice to the actors, what could Booth or Betterton have made of fuch horrible ftuff as Fenton's Mariamne, Frowd's Philotas, or Mallet's Eurydice; or thofe low, dirty, laft-dying-fpeeches, which a fellow in the city of Wapping, your Dillo or Lillo, what was his name, called tragedies?"--"Very well," fays the player; "and pray what do you think of fuch fellows as Quin and Delane, or that face-making puppy young Cibber, that ill-looked dog Macklin, or that faucy flut Mrs Clive? What work would they make with your Shakefpears, Otways, and Lees? How would thofe harmonious lines of the laft come from their tongues?-- "'--No more; for I difdain All pomp when thou art by: far be the noife Of kings and crowns from us, whofe gentle fouls Our kinder fates have fteer'd another way. Free as the foreft birds we'll pair together, Without rememb'ring who our fathers were: Fly to the arbors, grots, and flow'ry meads; There in foft murmurs interchange our fouls; Together drink the cryftal of the ftream, Or tafte the yellow fruit which autumn yields, And, when the golden evening calls us home, Wing to our downy nefts, and fleep till morn.' "Or how would this difdain of Otway-- "'Who'd be that foolifh fordid thing call'd man?'" "Hold! hold! hold!" faid the poet: "Do repeat that tender fpeech in the third act of my play which you made fuch a figure in."--"I would willingly," faid the player, "but I have forgot it."--"Ay, you was not quite perfect in it when you played it," cries the poet, "or you would have had fuch an applaufe as was never given on the ftage; an applaufe I was extremely concerned for your lofing."--"Sure," fays the player, "if I remember, that was hiffed more than any paffage in the whole play."--"Ay, your fpeaking it was hiffed," faid the poet.--"My fpeaking it!" faid the player.--"I mean your not fpeaking it," faid the poet. "You was out, and then they hiffed."--"They hiffed, and then I was out, if I remember," anfwered the player; "and I muft fay this for myfelf, that the whole audience allowed I did your part juftice; fo don't lay the damnation of your play to my account."--"I don't know what you mean by damnation," replied the poet.--"Why, you know it was acted but one night," cried the player.--"No," faid the poet, "you and the whole town were enemies; the pit were all my enemies, fellows that would cut my throat, if the fear of hanging did not reftrain them. All taylors, fir, all taylors."--"Why fhould the taylors be fo angry with you?" cries the player. "I fuppofe you don't employ fo many in making your clothes."--"I admit your jeft," anfwered the poet; "but you remember the affair as well as myfelf; you know there was a party in the pit and upper gallery that would not fuffer it to be given out again; though much, ay infinitely, the majority, all the boxes in particular, were defirous of it; nay, moft of the ladies fwore they never would come to the houfe till it was acted again. Indeed, I muft own their policy was good in not letting it be given out a fecond time: for the rafcals knew if it had gone a fecond night it would have run fifty; for if ever there was diftrefs in a tragedy--I am not fond of my own performance; but if I fhould tell you what the beft judges faid of it--Nor was it entirely owing to my enemies neither that it did not fucceed on the ftage as well as it hath fince among the polite readers; for you can't fay it had juftice done it by the performers."--"I think," anfwered the player, "the performers did the diftrefs of it juftice; for I am fure we were in diftrefs enough, who were pelted with oranges all the laft act: we all imagined it would have been the laft act of our lives." The poet, whofe fury was now raifed, had juft attempted to anfwer when they were interrupted, and an end put to their difcourfe, by an accident, which if the reader is impatient to know, he muft fkip over the next chapter, which is a fort of counterpart to this, and contains fome of the beft and graveft matters in the whole book, being a difcourfe between parfon Abraham Adams and Mr Jofeph Andrews. CHAPTER XI. _Containing the exhortations of parfon Adams to his friend in affliction; calculated for the inftruction and improvement of the reader._ Jofeph no fooner came perfectly to himfelf than, perceiving his miftrefs gone, he bewailed her lofs with groans which would have pierced any heart but thofe which are poffeffed by fome people, and are made of a certain compofition not unlike flint in its hardnefs and other properties; for you may ftrike fire from them, which will dart through the eyes, but they can never diftil one drop of water the fame way. His own, poor youth! was of a fofter compofition; and at thofe words, "O my dear Fanny! O my love! fhall I never, never fee thee more?" his eyes overflowed with tears, which would have become any but a hero. In a word, his defpair was more eafy to be conceived than related. Mr Adams, after many groans, fitting with his back to Jofeph, began thus in a forrowful tone: "You cannot imagine, my good child, that I entirely blame thefe firft agonies of your grief; for, when miffortunes attack us by furprize, it muft require infinitely more learning than you are mafter of to refift them; but it is the bufinefs of a man and a Chriftian to fummon Reafon as quickly as he can to his aid; and fhe will prefently teach him patience and fubmiffion. Be comforted, therefore, child; I fay be comforted. It is true, you have loft the prettieft, kindeft, lovelieft, fweeteft young woman, one with whom you might have expected to have lived in happinefs, virtue, and innocence; by whom you might have promifed yourfelf many little darlings, who would have been the delight of your youth and the comfort of your age. You have not only loft her, but have reafon to fear the utmoft violence which luft and power can inflict upon her. Now, indeed, you may eafily raife ideas of horror, which might drive you to defpair."--"O I fhall run mad!" cries Jofeph. "O that I could but command my hands to tear my eyes out and my flefh off!"--"If you would ufe them to fuch purpofes, I am glad you can't," anfwered Adams. "I have ftated your miffortune as ftrong as I poffibly can; but, on the other fide, you are to confider you are a Chriftian, that no accident happens to us without the Divine permiffion, and that it is the duty of a man, and a Chriftian, to fubmit. We did not make ourfelves; but the fame power which made us rules over us, and we are abfolutely at his difpofal; he may do with us what he pleafes, nor have we any right to complain. A fecond reafon againft our complaint is our ignorance; for, as we know not future events, fo neither can we tell to what purpofe any accident tends; and that which at firft threatens us with evil may in the end produce our good. I fhould indeed have faid our ignorance is twofold (but I have not at prefent time to divide properly), for, as we know not to what purpofe any event is ultimately directed, fo neither can we affirm from what caufe it originally fprung. You are a man, and confequently a finner; and this may be a punifhment to you for your fins: indeed in this fenfe it may be efteemed as a good, yea, as the greateft good, which fatiffies the anger of Heaven, and averts that wrath which cannot continue without our deftruction. Thirdly, our impotency of relieving ourfelves demonftrates the folly and abfurdity of our complaints: for whom do we refift, or againft whom do we complain, but a power from whofe fhafts no armour can guard us, no fpeed can fly?--a power which leaves us no hope but in fubmiffion." "O fir!" cried Jofeph, "all this is very true, and very fine, and I could hear you all day if I was not fo grieved at heart as now I am."--"Would you take phyfic," fays Adams, "when you are well, and refufe it when you are fick? Is not comfort to be adminiftered to the afflicted, and not to thofe who rejoice or thofe who are at eafe?" "O! you have not fpoken one word of comfort to me yet!" returned Jofeph. "No!" cries Adams; "what am I then doing? what can I fay to comfort you?" "O tell me," cries Jofeph, "that Fanny will efcape back to my arms, that they fhall again enclofe that lovely creature, with all her fweetnefs, all her untainted innocence about her!" "Why, perhaps you may," cries Adams, "but I can't promife you what's to come. You muft, with perfect refignation, wait the event: if fhe be reftored to you again, it is your duty to be thankful, and fo it is if fhe be not. Jofeph, if you are wife and truly know your own intereft, you will peaceably and quietly fubmit to all the difpenfations of Providence, being thoroughly affured that all the miffortunes, how great foever, which happen to the righteous, happen to them for their own good. Nay, it is not your intereft only, but your duty, to abftain from immoderate grief; which if you indulge, you are not worthy the name of a Chriftian." He fpoke thefe laft words with an accent a little feverer than ufual; upon which Jofeph begged him not to be angry, faying, he miftook him if he thought he denied it was his duty, for he had known that long ago. "What fignifies knowing your duty, if you do not perform it?" anfwered Adams. "Your knowledge increafes your guilt. O Jofeph! I never thought you had this ftubbornnefs in your mind." Jofeph replied, "He fancied he mifunderftood him; which I affure you," fays he, "you do, if you imagine I endeavour to grieve; upon my foul I don't." Adams rebuked him for fwearing, and then proceeded to enlarge on the folly of grief, telling him, all the wife men and philofophers, even among the heathens, had written againft it, quoting feveral paffages from Seneca, and the Confolation, which, though it was not Cicero's, was, he faid, as good almoft as any of his works; and concluded all by hinting that immoderate grief in this cafe might incenfe that power which alone could reftore him his Fanny. This reafon, or indeed rather the idea which it raifed of the reftoration of his miftrefs, had more effect than all which the parfon had faid before, and for a moment abated his agonies; but, when his fears fufficiently fet before his eyes the danger that poor creature was in, his grief returned again with repeated violence, nor could Adams in the leaft affwage it; though it may be doubted in his behalf whether Socrates himfelf could have prevailed any better. They remained fome time in filence, and groans and fighs iffued from them both; at length Jofeph burft out into the following foliloquy:-- "Yes, I will bear my forrows like a man, But I muft alfo feel them as a man. I cannot but remember fuch things were, And were moft dear to me." Adams afked him what ftuff that was he repeated? To which he anfwered, they were fome lines he had gotten by heart out of a play. "Ay, there is nothing but heathenifm to be learned from plays," replied he. "I never heard of any plays fit for a Chriftian to read, but Cato and the Confcious Lovers; and, I muft own, in the latter there are fome things almoft folemn enough for a fermon." But we fhall now leave them a little, and enquire after the fubject of their converfation. CHAPTER XII. _More adventures, which we hope will as much pleafe as furprize the reader._ Neither the facetious dialogue which paffed between the poet and the player, nor the grave and truly folemn difcourfe of Mr Adams, will, we conceive, make the reader fufficient amends for the anxiety which he muft have felt on the account of poor Fanny, whom we left in fo deplorable a condition. We fhall therefore now proceed to the relation of what happened to that beautiful and innocent virgin, after fhe fell into the wicked hands of the captain. The man of war, having conveyed his charming prize out of the inn a little before day, made the utmoft expedition in his power towards the fquire's houfe, where this delicate creature was to be offered up a facrifice to the luft of a ravifher. He was not only deaf to all her bewailings and entreaties on the road, but accofted her ears with impurities which, having been never before accuftomed to them, fhe happily for herfelf very little underftood. At laft he changed his note, and attempted to foothe and mollify her, by fetting forth the fplendor and luxury which would be her fortune with a man who would have the inclination, and power too, to give her whatever her utmoft wifhes could defire; and told her he doubted not but fhe would foon look kinder on him, as the inftrument of her happinefs, and defpife that pitiful fellow whom her ignorance only could make her fond of. She anfwered, fhe knew not whom he meant; fhe never was fond of any pitiful fellow. "Are you affronted, madam," fays he, "at my calling him fo? But what better can be faid of one in a livery, notwithftanding your fondnefs for him?" She returned, that fhe did not underftand him, that the man had been her fellow-fervant, and fhe believed was as honeft a creature as any alive; but as for fondnefs for men--"I warrant ye," cries the captain, "we fhall find means to perfuade you to be fond; and I advife you to yield to gentle ones, for you may be affured that it is not in your power, by any ftruggles whatever, to preferve your virginity two hours longer. It will be your intereft to confent; for the fquire will be much kinder to you if he enjoys you willingly than by force." At which words fhe began to call aloud for affiftance (for it was now open day), but, finding none, fhe lifted her eyes to heaven, and fupplicated the Divine affiftance to preferve her innocence. The captain told her, if fhe perfifted in her vociferation, he would find a means of ftopping her mouth. And now the poor wretch, perceiving no hopes of fuccour, abandoned herfelf to defpair, and, fighing out the name of Jofeph! Jofeph! a river of tears ran down her lovely cheeks, and wet the handkerchief which covered her bofom. A horfeman now appeared in the road, upon which the captain threatened her violently if fhe complained; however, the moment they approached each other fhe begged him with the utmoft earneftnefs to relieve a diftreffed creature who was in the hands of a ravifher. The fellow ftopt at thofe words, but the captain affured him it was his wife, and that he was carrying her home from her adulterer, which fo fatiffied the fellow, who was an old one (and perhaps a married one too), that he wifhed him a good journey, and rode on. He was no fooner paft than the captain abufed her violently for breaking his commands, and threatened to gagg her, when two more horfemen, armed with piftols, came into the road juft before them. She again folicited their affiftance, and the captain told the fame ftory as before. Upon which one faid to the other, "That's a charming wench, Jack; I wifh I had been in the fellow's place, whoever he is." But the other, inftead of anfwering him, cried out, "Zounds, I know her;" and then, turning to her, faid, "Sure you are not Fanny Goodwill?"--"Indeed, indeed, I am," fhe cried--"O John, I know you now-Heaven hath fent you to my affiftance, to deliver me from this wicked man, who is carrying me away for his vile purpofes--O for God's fake refcue me from him!" A fierce dialogue immediately enfued between the captain and thefe two men, who, being both armed with piftols, and the chariot which they attended being now arrived, the captain faw both force and ftratagem were vain, and endeavoured to make his efcape, in which however he could not fucceed. The gentleman who rode in the chariot ordered it to ftop, and with an air of authority examined into the merits of the caufe; of which being advertifed by Fanny, whofe credit was confirmed by the fellow who knew her, he ordered the captain, who was all bloody from his encounter at the inn, to be conveyed as a prifoner behind the chariot, and very gallantly took Fanny into it; for, to fay the truth, this gentleman (who was no other than the celebrated Mr Peter Pounce, and who preceded the Lady Booby only a few miles, by fetting out earlier in the morning) was a very gallant perfon, and loved a pretty girl better than anything befides his own money or the money of other people. The chariot now proceeded towards the inn, which, as Fanny was informed, lay in their way, and where it arrived at that very time while the poet and player were difputing below-ftairs, and Adams and Jofeph were difcourfing back to back above; juft at that period to which we brought them both in the two preceding chapters the chariot ftopt at the door, and in an inftant Fanny, leaping from it, ran up to her Jofeph.--O reader! conceive if thou canft the joy which fired the breafts of thefe lovers on this meeting; and if thy own heart doth not fympathetically affift thee in this conception, I pity thee fincerely from my own; for let the hard-hearted villain know this, that there is a pleafure in a tender fenfation beyond any which he is capable of tafting. Peter, being informed by Fanny of the prefence of Adams, ftopt to fee him, and receive his homage; for, as Peter was an hypocrite, a fort of people whom Mr Adams never faw through, the one paid that refpect to his feeming goodnefs which the other believed to be paid to his riches; hence Mr Adams was fo much his favourite, that he once lent him four pounds thirteen fhillings and fixpence to prevent his going to gaol, on no greater fecurity than a bond and judgment, which probably he would have made no ufe of, though the money had not been (as it was) paid exactly at the time. It is not perhaps eafy to defcribe the figure of Adams; he had rifen in fuch a hurry, that he had on neither breeches, garters, nor ftockings; nor had he taken from his head a red fpotted handkerchief, which by night bound his wig, turned infide out, around his head. He had on his torn caffock and his greatcoat; but, as the remainder of his caffock hung down below his greatcoat, fo did a fmall ftripe of white, or rather whitifh, linen appear below that; to which we may add the feveral colours which appeared on his face, where a long pifs-burnt beard ferved to retain the liquor of the ftone-pot, and that of a blacker hue which diftilled from the mop.--This figure, which Fanny had delivered from his captivity, was no fooner fpied by Peter than it difordered the compofed gravity of his mufcles; however, he advifed him immediately to make himfelf clean, nor would accept his homage in that pickle. The poet and player no fooner faw the captain in captivity than they began to confider of their own fafety, of which flight prefented itfelf as the only means; they therefore both of them mounted the poet's horfe, and made the moft expeditious retreat in their power. The hoft, who well knew Mr Pounce and Lady Booby's livery, was not a little furprized at this change of the fcene; nor was his confufion much helped by his wife, who was now juft rifen, and, having heard from him the account of what had paffed, comforted him with a decent number of fools and blockheads; afked him why he did not confult her, and told him he would never leave following the nonfenfical dictates of his own numfkull till fhe and her family were ruined. Jofeph, being informed of the captain's arrival, and feeing his Fanny now in fafety, quitted her a moment, and, running downftairs, went directly to him, and ftripping off his coat, challenged him to fight; but the captain refufed, faying he did not underftand boxing. He then grafped a cudgel in one hand, and, catching the captain by the collar with the other, gave him a moft fevere drubbing, and ended with telling him he had now had fome revenge for what his dear Fanny had fuffered. When Mr Pounce had a little regaled himfelf with fome provifion which he had in his chariot, and Mr Adams had put on the beft appearance his clothes would allow him, Pounce ordered the captain into his prefence, for he faid he was guilty of felony, and the next juftice of peace fhould commit him; but the fervants (whofe appetite for revenge is foon fatiffied), being fufficiently contented with the drubbing which Jofeph had inflicted on him, and which was indeed of no very moderate kind, had fuffered him to go off, which he did, threatening a fevere revenge againft Jofeph, which I have never heard he thought proper to take. The miftrefs of the houfe made her voluntary appearance before Mr Pounce, and with a thoufand curtfies told him, "She hoped his honour would pardon her hufband, who was a very nonfenfe man, for the fake of his poor family; that indeed if he could be ruined alone, fhe fhould be very willing of it; for becaufe as why, his worfhip very well knew he deferved it; but fhe had three poor fmall children, who were not capable to get their own living; and if her hufband was fent to gaol, they muft all come to the parifh; for fhe was a poor weak woman, continually a-breeding, and had no time to work for them. She therefore hoped his honour would take it into his worfhip's confideration, and forgive her hufband this time; for fhe was fure he never intended any harm to man, woman, or child; and if it was not for that block-head of his own, the man in fome things was well enough; for fhe had had three children by him in lefs than three years, and was almoft ready to cry out the fourth time." She would have proceeded in this manner much longer, had not Peter ftopt her tongue, by telling her he had nothing to fay to her hufband nor her neither. So, as Adams and the reft had affured her of forgivenefs, fhe cried and curtfied out of the room. Mr Pounce was defirous that Fanny fhould continue her journey with him in the chariot; but fhe abfolutely refufed, faying fhe would ride behind Jofeph on a horfe which one of Lady Booby's fervants had equipped him with. But, alas! when the horfe appeared, it was found to be no other than that identical beaft which Mr Adams had left behind him at the inn, and which thefe honeft fellows, who knew him, had redeemed. Indeed, whatever horfe they had provided for Jofeph, they would have prevailed with him to mount none, no, not even to ride before his beloved Fanny, till the parfon was fupplied; much lefs would he deprive his friend of the beaft which belonged to him, and which he knew the moment he faw, though Adams did not; however, when he was reminded of the affair, and told that they had brought the horfe with them which he left behind, he anfwered--Blefs me! and fo I did. Adams was very defirous that Jofeph and Fanny fhould mount this horfe, and declared he could very eafily walk home. "If I walked alone," fays he, "I would wage a fhilling that the pedeftrian outftripped the equeftrian travellers; but, as I intend to take the company of a pipe, peradventure I may be an hour later." One of the fervants whifpered Jofeph to take him at his word, and fuffer the old put to walk if he would: this propofal was anfwered with an angry look and a peremptory refufal by Jofeph, who, catching Fanny up in his arms, averred he would rather carry her home in that manner, than take away Mr Adams's horfe and permit him to walk on foot. Perhaps, reader, thou haft feen a conteft between two gentlemen, or two ladies, quickly decided, though they have both afferted they would not eat fuch a nice morfel, and each infifted on the other's accepting it; but in reality both were very defirous to fwallow it themfelves. Do not therefore conclude hence that this difpute would have come to a fpeedy decifion: for here both parties were heartily in earneft, and it is very probable they would have remained in the inn-yard to this day, had not the good Peter Pounce put a ftop to it; for, finding he had no longer hopes of fatiffying his old appetite with Fanny, and being defirous of having fome one to whom he might communicate his grandeur, he told the parfon he would convey him home in his chariot. This favour was by Adams, with many bows and acknowledgments, accepted, though he afterwards faid, "he afcended the chariot rather that he might not offend than from any defire of riding in it, for that in his heart he preferred the pedeftrian even to the vehicular expedition." All matters being now fettled, the chariot, in which rode Adams and Pounce, moved forwards; and Jofeph having borrowed a pillion from the hoft, Fanny had juft feated herfelf thereon, and had laid hold of the girdle which her lover wore for that purpofe, when the wife beaft, who concluded that one at a time was fufficient, that two to one were odds, &c., difcovered much uneafinefs at his double load, and began to confider his hinder as his fore legs, moving the direct contrary way to that which is called forwards. Nor could Jofeph, with all his horfemanfhip, perfuade him to advance; but, without having any regard to the lovely part of the lovely girl which was on his back, he ufed fuch agitations, that, had not one of the men come immediately to her affiftance, fhe had, in plain Englifh, tumbled backwards on the ground. This inconvenience was prefently remedied by an exchange of horfes; and then Fanny being again placed on her pillion, on a better-natured and fomewhat a better-fed beaft, the parfon's horfe, finding he had no longer odds to contend with, agreed to march; and the whole proceffion fet forwards for Booby-hall, where they arrived in a few hours without anything remarkable happening on the road, unlefs it was a curious dialogue between the parfon and the fteward: which, to ufe the language of a late Apologift, a pattern to all biographers, "waits for the reader in the next chapter." CHAPTER XIII. _A curious dialogue which paffed between Mr Abraham Adams and Mr Peter Pounce, better worth reading than all the works of Colley Cibber and many others._ The chariot had not proceeded far before Mr Adams obferved it was a very fine day. "Ay, and a very fine country too," anfwered Pounce.--"I fhould think fo more," returned Adams, "if I had not lately travelled over the Downs, which I take to exceed this and all other profpects in the univerfe."--"A fig for profpects!" anfwered Pounce; "one acre here is worth ten there; and for my own part, I have no delight in the profpect of any land but my own."--"Sir," faid Adams, "you can indulge yourfelf with many fine profpects of that kind."--"I thank God I have a little," replied the other, "with which I am content, and envy no man: I have a little, Mr Adams, with which I do as much good as I can." Adams anfwered, "That riches without charity were nothing worth; for that they were a bleffing only to him who made them a bleffing to others."--"You and I," faid Peter, "have different notions of charity. I own, as it is generally ufed, I do not like the word, nor do I think it becomes one of us gentlemen; it is a mean parfon-like quality; though I would not infer many parfons have it neither."--"Sir," faid Adams, "my definition of charity is, a generous difpofition to relieve the diftreffed."--"There is fomething in that definition," anfwered Peter, "which I like well enough; it is, as you fay, a difpofition, and does not fo much confift in the act as in the difpofition to do it. But, alas! Mr Adams, who are meant by the diftreffed? Believe me, the diftreffes of mankind are moftly imaginary, and it would be rather folly than goodnefs to relieve them."--"Sure, fir," replied Adams, "hunger and thirft, cold and nakednefs, and other diftreffes which attend the poor, can never be faid to be imaginary evils."--"How can any man complain of hunger," faid Peter, "in a country where fuch excellent falads are to be gathered in almoft every field? or of thirft, where every river and ftream produces fuch delicious potations? And as for cold and nakednefs, they are evils introduced by luxury and cuftom. A man naturally wants clothes no more than a horfe or any other animal; and there are whole nations who go without them; but thefe are things perhaps which you, who do not know the world"--"You will pardon me, fir," returned Adams; "I have read of the Gymnofophifts."--"A plague of your Jehofaphats!" cried Peter; "the greateft fault in our conftitution is the provifion made for the poor, except that perhaps made for fome others. Sir, I have not an eftate which doth not contribute almoft as much again to the poor as to the land-tax; and I do affure you I expect to come myfelf to the parifh in the end." To which Adams giving a diffenting fmile, Peter thus proceeded: "I fancy, Mr Adams, you are one of thofe who imagine I am a lump of money; for there are many who, I fancy, believe that not only my pockets, but my whole clothes, are lined with bank-bills; but I affure you, you are all miftaken; I am not the man the world efteems me. If I can hold my head above water it is all I can. I have injured myfelf by purchafing. I have been too liberal of my money. Indeed, I fear my heir will find my affairs in a worfe fituation than they are reputed to be. Ah! he will have reafon to wifh I had loved money more and land lefs. Pray, my good neighbour, where fhould I have that quantity of riches the world is fo liberal to beftow on me? Where could I poffibly, without I had ftole it, acquire fuch a treafure?" "Why, truly," fays Adams, "I have been always of your opinion; I have wondered as well as yourfelf with what confidence they could report fuch things of you, which have to me appeared as mere impoffibilities; for you know, fir, and I have often heard you fay it, that your wealth is of your own acquifition; and can it be credible that in your fhort time you fhould have amaffed fuch a heap of treafure as thefe people will have you worth? Indeed, had you inherited an eftate like Sir Thomas Booby, which had defcended in your family for many generations, they might have had a colour for their affertions." "Why, what do they fay I am worth?" cries Peter, with a malicious fneer. "Sir," anfwered Adams, "I have heard fome aver you are not worth lefs than twenty thoufand pounds." At which Peter frowned. "Nay, fir," faid Adams, "you afk me only the opinion of others; for my own part, I have always denied it, nor did I ever believe you could poffibly be worth half that fum." "However, Mr Adams," faid he, fqueezing him by the hand, "I would not fell them all I am worth for double that fum; and as to what you believe, or they believe, I care not a fig, no not a fart. I am not poor becaufe you think me fo, nor becaufe you attempt to undervalue me in the country. I know the envy of mankind very well; but I thank Heaven I am above them. It is true, my wealth is of my own acquifition. I have not an eftate, like Sir Thomas Booby, that has defcended in my family through many generations; but I know heirs of fuch eftates who are forced to travel about the country like fome people in torn caffocks, and might be glad to accept of a pitiful curacy for what I know. Yes, fir, as fhabby fellows as yourfelf, whom no man of my figure, without that vice of good-nature about him, would fuffer to ride in a chariot with him." "Sir," faid Adams, "I value not your chariot of a rufh; and if I had known you had intended to affront me, I would have walked to the world's end on foot ere I would have accepted a place in it. However, fir, I will foon rid you of that inconvenience;" and, fo faying, he opened the chariot door, without calling to the coachman, and leapt out into the highway, forgetting to take his hat along with him; which, however, Mr Pounce threw after him with great violence. Jofeph and Fanny ftopt to bear him company the reft of the way, which was not above a mile. BOOK IV. CHAPTER I. _The arrival of Lady Booby and the reft at Booby-hall._ The coach and fix, in which Lady Booby rode, overtook the other travellers as they entered the parifh. She no fooner faw Jofeph than her cheeks glowed with red, and immediately after became as totally pale. She had in her furprize almoft ftopt her coach; but recollected herfelf timely enough to prevent it. She entered the parifh amidft the ringing of bells and the acclamations of the poor, who were rejoiced to fee their patronefs returned after fo long an abfence, during which time all her rents had been drafted to London, without a fhilling being fpent among them, which tended not a little to their utter impoverifhing; for, if the court would be feverely miffed in fuch a city as London, how much more muft the abfence of a perfon of great fortune be felt in a little country village, for whofe inhabitants fuch a family finds a conftant employment and fupply; and with the offals of whofe table the infirm, aged, and infant poor are abundantly fed, with a generofity which hath fcarce a vifible effect on their benefactors' pockets! But, if their intereft infpired fo public a joy into every countenance, how much more forcibly did the affection which they bore parfon Adams operate upon all who beheld his return! They flocked about him like dutiful children round an indulgent parent, and vyed with each other in demonftrations of duty and love. The parfon on his fide fhook every one by the hand, enquired heartily after the healths of all that were abfent, of their children, and relations; and expreft a fatiffaction in his face which nothing but benevolence made happy by its objects could infufe. Nor did Jofeph and Fanny want a hearty welcome from all who faw them. In fhort, no three perfons could be more kindly received, as, indeed, none ever more deferved to be univerfally beloved. Adams carried his fellow-travellers home to his houfe, where he infifted on their partaking whatever his wife, whom, with his children, he found in health and joy, could provide:--where we fhall leave them enjoying perfect happinefs over a homely meal, to view fcenes of greater fplendour, but infinitely lefs blifs. Our more intelligent readers will doubtlefs fufpect, by this fecond appearance of Lady Booby on the ftage, that all was not ended by the difmiffion of Jofeph; and, to be honeft with them, they are in the right: the arrow had pierced deeper than fhe imagined; nor was the wound fo eafily to be cured. The removal of the object foon cooled her rage, but it had a different effect on her love; that departed with his perfon, but this remained lurking in her mind with his image. Reftlefs, interrupted flumbers, and confufed horrible dreams were her portion the firft night. In the morning, fancy painted her a more delicious fcene; but to delude, not delight her; for, before fhe could reach the promifed happinefs, it vanifhed, and left her to curfe, not blefs, the vifion. She ftarted from her fleep, her imagination being all on fire with the phantom, when, her eyes accidentally glancing towards the fpot where yefterday the real Jofeph had ftood, that little circumftance raifed his idea in the livelieft colours in her memory. Each look, each word, each gefture rufhed back on her mind with charms which all his coldnefs could not abate. Nay, fhe imputed that to his youth, his folly, his awe, his religion, to everything but what would inftantly have produced contempt, want of paffion for the fex, or that which would have roufed her hatred, want of liking to her. Reflection then hurried her farther, and told her fhe muft fee this beautiful youth no more; nay, fuggefted to her that fhe herfelf had difmiffed him for no other fault than probably that of too violent an awe and refpect for herfelf; and which fhe ought rather to have efteemed a merit, the effects of which were befides fo eafily and furely to have been removed; fhe then blamed, fhe curfed the hafty rafhnefs of her temper; her fury was vented all on herfelf, and Jofeph appeared innocent in her eyes. Her paffion at length grew fo violent, that it forced her on feeking relief, and now fhe thought of recalling him: but pride forbad that; pride, which foon drove all fofter paffions from her foul, and reprefented to her the meannefs of him fhe was fond of. That thought foon began to obfcure his beauties; contempt fucceeded next, and then difdain, which prefently introduced her hatred of the creature who had given her fo much uneafinefs. Thefe enemies of Jofeph had no fooner taken poffeffion of her mind than they infinuated to her a thoufand things in his diffavour; everything but diflike of her perfon; a thought which, as it would have been intolerable to bear, fhe checked the moment it endeavoured to arife. Revenge came now to her affiftance; and fhe confidered her difmiffion of him, ftript, and without a character, with the utmoft pleafure. She rioted in the feveral kinds of mifery which her imagination fuggefted to her might be his fate; and, with a fmile compofed of anger, mirth, and fcorn, viewed him in the rags in which her fancy had dreft him. Mrs Slipflop, being fummoned, attended her miftrefs, who had now in her own opinion totally fubdued this paffion. Whilft fhe was dreffing fhe afked if that fellow had been turned away according to her orders. Slipflop anfwered, fhe had told her ladyfhip fo (as indeed fhe had).--"And how did he behave?" replied the lady. "Truly, madam," cries Slipflop, "in fuch a manner that infected everybody who faw him. The poor lad had but little wages to receive; for he conftantly allowed his father and mother half his income; fo that, when your ladyfhip's livery was ftript off, he had not wherewithal to buy a coat, and muft have gone naked if one of the footmen had not incommodated him with one; and whilft he was ftanding in his fhirt (and, to fay truth, he was an amorous figure), being told your ladyfhip would not give him a character, he fighed, and faid he had done nothing willingly to offend; that for his part, he fhould always give your ladyfhip a good character wherever he went; and he prayed God to blefs you; for you was the beft of ladies, though his enemies had fet you againft him. I wifh you had not turned him away; for I believe you have not a faithfuller fervant in the houfe."--"How came you then," replied the lady, "to advife me to turn him away?"--"I, madam!" faid Slipflop; "I am fure you will do me the juftice to fay, I did all in my power to prevent it; but I faw your ladyfhip was angry; and it is not the bufinefs of us upper fervants to hinterfear on thefe occafions." "And was it not you, audacious wretch!" cried the lady, "who made me angry? Was it not your tittle-tattle, in which I believe you belyed the poor fellow, which incenfed me againft him? He may thank you for all that hath happened; and fo may I for the lofs of a good fervant, and one who probably had more merit than all of you. Poor fellow! I am charmed with his goodnefs to his parents. Why did not you tell me of that, but fuffer me to difmifs fo good a creature without a character? I fee the reafon of your whole behaviour now as well as your complaint; you was jealous of the wenches." "I jealous!" faid Slipflop; "I affure you, I look upon myfelf as his betters; I am not meat for a footman, I hope." Thefe words threw the lady into a violent paffion, and fhe fent Slipflop from her prefence, who departed, toffing her nofe, and crying, "Marry, come up! there are fome people more jealous than I, I believe." Her lady affected not to hear the words, though in reality fhe did, and underftood them too. Now enfued a fecond conflict, fo like the former, that it might favour of repetition to relate it minutely. It may fuffice to fay that Lady Booby found good reafon to doubt whether fhe had fo abfolutely conquered her paffion as fhe had flattered herfelf; and, in order to accomplifh it quite, took a refolution, more common than wife, to retire immediately into the country. The reader hath long ago feen the arrival of Mrs Slipflop, whom no pertnefs could make her miftrefs refolve to part with; lately, that of Mr Pounce, her forerunners; and, laftly, that of the lady herfelf. The morning after her arrival being Sunday, fhe went to church, to the great furprize of everybody, who wondered to fee her ladyfhip, being no very conftant church-woman, there fo fuddenly upon her journey. Jofeph was likewife there; and I have heard it was remarked that fhe fixed her eyes on him much more than on the parfon; but this I believe to be only a malicious rumour. When the prayers were ended Mr Adams ftood up, and with a loud voice pronounced, "I publifh the banns of marriage between Jofeph Andrews and Frances Goodwill, both of this parifh," &c. Whether this had any effect on Lady Booby or no, who was then in her pew, which the congregation could not fee into, I could never difcover: but certain it is that in about a quarter of an hour fhe ftood up, and directed her eyes to that part of the church where the women fat, and perfifted in looking that way during the remainder of the fermon in fo fcrutinizing a manner, and with fo angry a countenance, that moft of the women were afraid fhe was offended at them. The moment fhe returned home fhe fent for Slipflop into her chamber, and told her fhe wondered what that impudent fellow Jofeph did in that parifh? Upon which Slipflop gave her an account of her meeting Adams with him on the road, and likewife the adventure with Fanny. At the relation of which the lady often changed her countenance; and when fhe had heard all, fhe ordered Mr Adams into her prefence, to whom fhe behaved as the reader will fee in the next chapter. CHAPTER II. _A dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and the Lady Booby._ Mr Adams was not far off, for he was drinking her ladyfhip's health below in a cup of her ale. He no fooner came before her than fhe began in the following manner: "I wonder, fir, after the many great obligations you have had to this family" (with all which the reader hath in the courfe of this hiftory been minutely acquainted), "that you will ungratefully fhow any refpect to a fellow who hath been turned out of it for his mifdeeds. Nor doth it, I can tell you, fir, become a man of your character, to run about the country with an idle fellow and wench. Indeed, as for the girl, I know no harm of her. Slipflop tells me fhe was formerly bred up in my houfe, and behaved as fhe ought, till fhe hankered after this fellow, and he fpoiled her. Nay, fhe may ftill, perhaps, do very well, if he will let her alone. You are, therefore, doing a monftrous thing in endeavouring to procure a match between thefe two people, which will be to the ruin of them both."--"Madam," faid Adams, "if your ladyfhip will but hear me fpeak, I proteft I never heard any harm of Mr Jofeph Andrews; if I had, I fhould have corrected him for it; for I never have, nor will, encourage the faults of thofe under my care. As for the young woman, I affure your ladyfhip I have as good an opinion of her as your ladyfhip yourfelf or any other can have. She is the fweeteft-tempered, honefteft, worthieft young creature; indeed, as to her beauty, I do not commend her on that account, though all men allow fhe is the handfomeft woman, gentle or fimple, that ever appeared in the parifh."--"You are very impertinent," fays fhe, "to talk fuch fulfome ftuff to me. It is mighty becoming truly in a clergyman to trouble himfelf about handfome women, and you are a delicate judge of beauty, no doubt. A man who hath lived all his life in fuch a parifh as this is a rare judge of beauty! Ridiculous! beauty indeed! a country wench a beauty! I fhall be fick whenever I hear beauty mentioned again. And fo this wench is to ftock the parifh with beauties, I hope. But, fir, our poor is numerous enough already; I will have no more vagabonds fettled here."--"Madam," fays Adams, "your ladyfhip is offended with me, I proteft, without any reafon. This couple were defirous to confummate long ago, and I diffuaded them from it; nay, I may venture to fay, I believe I was the fole caufe of their delaying it."--"Well," fays fhe, "and you did very wifely and honeftly too, notwithftanding fhe is the greateft beauty in the parifh."--"And now, madam," continued he, "I only perform my office to Mr Jofeph."--"Pray, don't mifter fuch fellows to me," cries the lady. "He," faid the parfon, "with the confent of Fanny, before my face, put in the banns." "Yes," anfwered the lady, "I fuppofe the flut is forward enough; Slipflop tells me how her head runs upon fellows; that is one of her beauties, I fuppofe. But if they have put in the banns, I defire you will publifh them no more without my orders."--"Madam," cries Adams, "if any one puts in a fufficient caution, and affigns a proper reafon againft them, I am willing to furceafe."--"I tell you a reafon," fays fhe: "he is a vagabond, and he fhall not fettle here, and bring a neft of beggars into the parifh; it will make us but little amends that they will be beauties."--"Madam," anfwered Adams, "with the utmoft fubmiffion to your ladyfhip, I have been informed by lawyer Scout that any perfon who ferves a year gains a fettlement in the parifh where he ferves."--"Lawyer Scout," replied the lady, "is an impudent coxcomb; I will have no lawyer Scout interfere with me. I repeat to you again, I will have no more incumbrances brought on us: fo I defire you will proceed no farther."--"Madam," returned Adams, "I would obey your ladyfhip in everything that is lawful; but furely the parties being poor is no reafon againft their marrying. God forbid there fhould be any fuch law! The poor have little fhare enough of this world already; it would be barbarous indeed to deny them the common privileges and innocent enjoyments which nature indulges to the animal creation."--"Since you underftand yourfelf no better," cries the lady, "nor the refpect due from fuch as you to a woman of my diftinction, than to affront my ears by fuch loofe difcourfe, I fhall mention but one fhort word; it is my orders to you that you publifh thefe banns no more; and if you dare, I will recommend it to your mafter, the doctor, to difcard you from his fervice. I will, fir, notwithftanding your poor family; and then you and the greateft beauty in the parifh may go and beg together."--"Madam," anfwered Adams, "I know not what your ladyfhip means by the terms mafter and fervice. I am in the fervice of a Mafter who will never difcard me for doing my duty; and if the doctor (for indeed I have never been able to pay for a licence) thinks proper to turn me from my cure, God will provide me, I hope, another. At leaft, my family, as well as myfelf, have hands; and he will profper, I doubt not, our endeavours to get our bread honeftly with them. Whilft my confcience is pure, I fhall never fear what man can do unto me."--"I condemn my humility," faid the lady, "for demeaning myfelf to converfe with you fo long. I fhall take other meafures; for I fee you are a confederate with them. But the fooner you leave me the better; and I fhall give orders that my doors may no longer be open to you. I will fuffer no parfons who run about the country with beauties to be entertained here."--"Madam," faid Adams, "I fhall enter into no perfons' doors againft their will; but I am affured, when you have enquired farther into this matter, you will applaud, not blame, my proceeding; and fo I humbly take my leave:" which he did with many bows, or at leaft many attempts at a bow. CHAPTER III. _What paffed between the lady and lawyer Scout._ In the afternoon the lady fent for Mr Scout, whom fhe attacked moft violently for intermeddling with her fervants, which he denied, and indeed with truth, for he had only afferted accidentally, and perhaps rightly, that a year's fervice gained a fettlement; and fo far he owned he might have formerly informed the parfon and believed it was law. "I am refolved," faid the lady, "to have no difcarded fervants of mine fettled here; and fo, if this be your law, I fhall fend to another lawyer." Scout faid, "If fhe fent to a hundred lawyers, not one or all of them could alter the law. The utmoft that was in the power of a lawyer was to prevent the law's taking effect; and that he himfelf could do for her ladyfhip as well as any other; and I believe," fays he, "madam, your ladyfhip, not being converfant in thefe matters, hath miftaken a difference; for I afferted only that a man who ferved a year was fettled. Now there is a material difference between being fettled in law and fettled in fact; and as I affirmed generally he was fettled, and law is preferable to fact, my fettlement muft be underftood in law and not in fact. And fuppofe, madam, we admit he was fettled in law, what ufe will they make of it? how doth that relate to fact? He is not fettled in fact; and if he be not fettled in fact, he is not an inhabitant; and if he is not an inhabitant, he is not of this parifh; and then undoubtedly he ought not to be publifhed here; for Mr Adams hath told me your ladyfhip's pleafure, and the reafon, which is a very good one, to prevent burdening us with the poor; we have too many already, and I think we ought to have an act to hang or tranfport half of them. If we can prove in evidence that he is not fettled in fact, it is another matter. What I faid to Mr Adams was on a fuppofition that he was fettled in fact; and indeed, if that was the cafe, I fhould doubt."--"Don't tell me your facts and your ifs," faid the lady; "I don't underftand your gibberifh; you take too much upon you, and are very impertinent, in pretending to direct in this parifh; and you fhall be taught better, I affure you, you fhall. But as to the wench, I am refolved fhe fhall not fettle here; I will not fuffer fuch beauties as thefe to produce children for us to keep."--"Beauties, indeed! your ladyfhip is pleafed to be merry," anfwered Scout.--"Mr Adams defcribed her fo to me," faid the lady. "Pray, what fort of dowdy is it, Mr Scout?"--"The uglieft creature almoft I ever beheld; a poor dirty drab, your ladyfhip never faw fuch a wretch."--"Well, but, dear Mr Scout, let her be what fhe will, thefe ugly women will bring children, you know; fo that we muft prevent the marriage."--"True, madam," replied Scout, "for the fubfequent marriage co-operating with the law will carry law into fact. When a man is married he is fettled in fact, and then he is not removable. I will fee Mr Adams, and I make no doubt of prevailing with him. His only objection is, doubtlefs, that he fhall lofe his fee; but that being once made eafy, as it fhall be, I am confident no farther objection will remain. No, no, it is impoffible; but your ladyfhip can't difcommend his unwillingnefs to depart from his fee. Every man ought to have a proper value for his fee. As to the matter in queftion, if your ladyfhip pleafes to employ me in it, I will venture to promife you fuccefs. The laws of this land are not fo vulgar to permit a mean fellow to contend with one of your ladyfhip's fortune. We have one fure card, which is, to carry him before Juftice Frolick, who, upon hearing your ladyfhip's name, will commit him without any farther queftions. As for the dirty flut, we fhall have nothing to do with her; for, if we get rid of the fellow, the ugly jade will--"--"Take what meafures you pleafe, good Mr Scout," anfwered the lady: "but I wifh you could rid the parifh of both; for Slipflop tells me fuch ftories of this wench, that I abhor the thoughts of her; and, though you fay fhe is fuch an ugly flut, yet you know, dear Mr Scout, thefe forward creatures, who run after men, will always find fome as forward as themfelves; fo that, to prevent the increafe of beggars, we muft get rid of her."--"Your ladyfhip is very much in the right," anfwered Scout; "but I am afraid the law is a little deficient in giving us any fuch power of prevention; however, the juftice will ftretch it as far as he is able, to oblige your ladyfhip. To fay truth, it is a great bleffing to the country that he is in the commiffion, for he hath taken feveral poor off our hands that the law would never lay hold on. I know fome juftices who think as much of committing a man to Bridewell as his lordfhip at 'fize would of hanging him; but it would do a man good to fee his worfhip, our juftice, commit a fellow to Bridewell, he takes fo much pleafure in it; and when once we ha'um there, we feldom hear any more o'um. He's either ftarved or eat up by vermin in a month's time."--Here the arrival of a vifitor put an end to the converfation, and Mr Scout, having undertaken the caufe and promifed it fuccefs, departed. This Scout was one of thofe fellows who, without any knowledge of the law, or being bred to it, take upon them, in defiance of an act of Parliament, to act as lawyers in the country, and are called fo. They are the pefts of fociety, and a fcandal to a profeffion, to which indeed they do not belong, and which owes to fuch kind of rafcallions the ill-will which weak perfons bear towards it. With this fellow, to whom a little before fhe would not have condefcended to have fpoken, did a certain paffion for Jofeph, and the jealoufy and the difdain of poor innocent Fanny, betray the Lady Booby into a familiar difcourfe, in which fhe inadvertently confirmed many hints with which Slipflop, whofe gallant he was, had pre-acquainted him; and whence he had taken an opportunity to affert thofe fevere falfehoods of little Fanny which poffibly the reader might not have been well able to account for if we had not thought proper to give him this information. CHAPTER IV. _A fhort chapter, but very full of matter; particularly the arrival of Mr Booby and his lady._ All that night, and the next day, the Lady Booby paft with the utmoft anxiety; her mind was diftracted and her foul toffed up and down by many turbulent and oppofite paffions. She loved, hated, pitied, fcorned, admired, defpifed the fame perfon by fits, which changed in a very fhort interval. On Tuefday morning, which happened to be a holiday, fhe went to church, where, to her furprize, Mr Adams publifhed the banns again with as audible a voice as before. It was lucky for her that, as there was no fermon, fhe had an immediate opportunity of returning home to vent her rage, which fhe could not have concealed from the congregation five minutes; indeed, it was not then very numerous, the affembly confifting of no more than Adams, his clerk, his wife, the lady, and one of her fervants. At her return fhe met Slipflop, who accofted her in thefe words:--"O meam, what doth your ladyfhip think? To be fure, lawyer Scout hath carried Jofeph and Fanny both before the juftice. All the parifh are in tears, and fay they will certainly be hanged; for nobody knows what it is for"--"I fuppofe they deferve it," fays the lady. "What! doft thou mention fuch wretches to me?"--"O dear madam," anfwered Slipflop, "is it not a pity fuch a gracelefs young man fhould die a virulent death? I hope the judge will take commenfuration on his youth. As for Fanny, I don't think it fignifies much what becomes of her; and if poor Jofeph hath done anything, I could venture to fwear fhe traduced him to it: few men ever come to a fragrant punifhment, but by thofe nafty creatures, who are a fcandal to our fect." The lady was no more pleafed at this news, after a moment's reflection, than Slipflop herfelf; for, though fhe wifhed Fanny far enough, fhe did not defire the removal of Jofeph, efpecially with her. She was puzzled how to act or what to fay on this occafion, when a coach and fix drove into the court, and a fervant acquainted her with the arrival of her nephew Booby and his lady. She ordered them to be conducted into a drawing-room, whither fhe prefently repaired, having compofed her countenance as well as fhe could, and being a little fatiffied that the wedding would by thefe means be at leaft interrupted, and that fhe fhould have an opportunity to execute any refolution fhe might take, for which fhe faw herfelf provided with an excellent inftrument in Scout. The Lady Booby apprehended her fervant had made a miftake when he mentioned Mr Booby's lady; for fhe had never heard of his marriage: but how great was her furprize when, at her entering the room, her nephew prefented his wife to her; faying, "Madam, this is that charming Pamela, of whom I am convinced you have heard fo much." The lady received her with more civility than he expected; indeed with the utmoft; for fhe was perfectly polite, nor had any vice inconfiftent with good-breeding. They paft fome little time in ordinary difcourfe, when a fervant came and whifpered Mr Booby, who prefently told the ladies he muft defert them a little on fome bufinefs of confequence; and, as their difcourfe during his abfence would afford little improvement or entertainment to the reader, we will leave them for a while to attend Mr Booby. CHAPTER V. _Containing juftice bufinefs; curious precedents of depofitions, and other matters neceffary to be perufed by all juftices of the peace and their clerks._ The young fquire and his lady were no fooner alighted from their coach than the fervants began to inquire after Mr Jofeph, from whom they faid their lady had not heard a word, to her great furprize, fince he had left Lady Booby's. Upon this they were inftantly informed of what had lately happened, with which they haftily acquainted their mafter, who took an immediate refolution to go himfelf, and endeavour to reftore his Pamela her brother, before fhe even knew fhe had loft him. The juftice before whom the criminals were carried, and who lived within a fhort mile of the lady's houfe, was luckily Mr Booby's acquaintance, by his having an eftate in his neighbourhood. Ordering therefore his horfes to his coach, he fet out for the judgment-feat, and arrived when the juftice had almoft finifhed his bufinefs. He was conducted into a hall, where he was acquainted that his worfhip would wait on him in a moment; for he had only a man and a woman to commit to Bridewell firft. As he was now convinced he had not a minute to lofe, he infifted on the fervant's introducing him directly into the room where the juftice was then executing his office, as he called it. Being brought thither, and the firft compliments being paffed between the fquire and his worfhip, the former afked the latter what crime thofe two young people had been guilty of? "No great crime," anfwered the juftice; "I have only ordered them to Bridewell for a month." "But what is their crime?" repeated the fquire. "Larceny, an't pleafe your honour," faid Scout. "Ay," fays the juftice, "a kind of felonious larcenous thing. I believe I muft order them a little correction too, a little ftripping and whipping." (Poor Fanny, who had hitherto fupported all with the thoughts of Jofeph's company, trembled at that found; but, indeed, without reafon, for none but the devil himfelf would have executed fuch a fentence on her.) "Still," faid the fquire, "I am ignorant of the crime--the fact I mean." "Why, there it is in peaper," anfwered the juftice, fhowing him a depofition which, in the abfence of his clerk, he had writ himfelf, of which we have with great difficulty procured an authentic copy; and here it follows _verbatim et literatim:_-- _The depufition of James Scout, layer, and Thomas Trotter, yeoman, taken before mee, one of his magefty's juftaffes of the piece for Zumerfetfhire._ "Thefe deponants faith, and firft Thomas Trotter for himfelf faith, that on the -- of this inftant October, being Sabbath-day, betwin the ours of 2 and 4 in the afternoon, he zeed Jofeph Andrews and Francis Goodwill walk akrofs a certane felde belunging to layer Scout, and out of the path which ledes thru the faid felde, and there he zede Jofeph Andrews with a nife cut one haffel twig, of the value, as he believes, of three half-pence, or thereabouts; and he faith that the faid Francis Goodwill was likewife walking on the grafs out of the faid path in the faid felde, and did receive and karry in her hand the faid twig, and fo was cumfarting, eading, and abatting to the faid Jofeph therein. And the faid James Scout for himfelf fays that he verily believes the faid twig to be his own proper twig," &c. "Jefu!" faid the fquire, "would you commit two perfons to Bridewell for a twig?" "Yes," faid the lawyer, "and with great lenity too; for if we had called it a young tree, they would have been both hanged." "Harkee," fays the juftice, taking afide the fquire; "I fhould not have been fo fevere on this occafion, but Lady Booby defires to get them out of the parifh; fo lawyer Scout will give the conftable orders to let them run away, if they pleafe: but it feems they intend to marry together, and the lady hath no other means, as they are legally fettled there, to prevent their bringing an incumbrance on her own parifh." "Well," faid the fquire, "I will take care my aunt fhall be fatiffied in this point; and likewife I promife you, Jofeph here fhall never be any incumbrance on her. I fhall be obliged to you, therefore, if, inftead of Bridewell, you will commit them to my cuftody." "O! to be fure, fir, if you defire it," anfwered the juftice; and without more ado Jofeph and Fanny were delivered over to Squire Booby, whom Jofeph very well knew, but little gueffed how nearly he was related to him. The juftice burnt his mittimus, the conftable was fent about his bufinefs, the lawyer made no complaint for want of juftice; and the prifoners, with exulting hearts, gave a thoufand thanks to his honour Mr Booby; who did not intend their obligations to him fhould ceafe here; for, ordering his man to produce a cloak-bag, which he had caufed to be brought from Lady Booby's on purpofe, he defired the juftice that he might have Jofeph with him into a room; where, ordering his fervant to take out a fuit of his own clothes, with linnen and other neceffaries, he left Jofeph to drefs himfelf, who, not yet knowing the caufe of all this civility, excufed his accepting fuch a favour as long as decently he could. Whilft Jofeph was dreffing, the fquire repaired to the juftice, whom he found talking with Fanny; for, during the examination, fhe had flopped her hat over her eyes, which were alfo bathed in tears, and had by that means concealed from his worfhip what might perhaps have rendered the arrival of Mr Booby unneceffary, at leaft for herfelf. The juftice no fooner faw her countenance cleared up, and her bright eyes fhining through her tears, than he fecretly curfed himfelf for having once thought of Bridewell for her. He would willingly have fent his own wife thither, to have had Fanny in her place. And, conceiving almoft at the fame inftant defires and fchemes to accomplifh them, he employed the minutes whilft the fquire was abfent with Jofeph in affuring her how forry he was for having treated her fo roughly before he knew her merit; and told her, that fince Lady Booby was unwilling that fhe fhould fettle in her parifh, fhe was heartily welcome to his, where he promifed her his protection, adding that he would take Jofeph and her into his own family, if fhe liked it; which affurance he confirmed with a fqueeze by the hand. She thanked him very kindly, and faid, "She would acquaint Jofeph with the offer, which he would certainly be glad to accept; for that Lady Booby was angry with them both; though fhe did not know either had done anything to offend her, but imputed it to Madam Slipflop, who had always been her enemy." The fquire now returned, and prevented any farther continuance of this converfation; and the juftice, out of a pretended refpect to his gueft, but in reality from an apprehenfion of a rival (for he knew nothing of his marriage), ordered Fanny into the kitchen, whither fhe gladly retired; nor did the fquire, who declined the trouble of explaining the whole matter, oppofe it. It would be unneceffary, if I was able, which indeed I am not, to relate the converfation between thefe two gentlemen, which rolled, as I have been informed, entirely on the fubject of horfe-racing. Jofeph was foon dreft in the plaineft drefs he could find, which was a blue coat and breeches, with a gold edging, and a red waiftcoat with the fame: and as this fuit, which was rather too large for the fquire, exactly fitted him, fo he became it fo well, and looked fo genteel, that no perfon would have doubted its being as well adapted to his quality as his fhape; nor have fufpected, as one might, when my Lord ----, or Sir ----, or Mr ----, appear in lace or embroidery, that the taylor's man wore thofe clothes home on his back which he fhould have carried under his arm. The fquire now took leave of the juftice; and, calling for Fanny, made her and Jofeph, againft their wills, get into the coach with him, which he then ordered to drive to Lady Booby's. It had moved a few yards only, when the fquire afked Jofeph if he knew who that man was croffing the field; for, added he, I never faw one take fuch ftrides before. Jofeph anfwered eagerly, "O, fir, it is parfon Adams!" "O la, indeed, and fo it is," faid Fanny; "poor man, he is coming to do what he could for us. Well, he is the worthieft, beft-natured creature."--"Ay," faid Jofeph; "God blefs him! for there is not fuch another in the univerfe." "The beft creature living fure," cries Fanny. "Is he?" fays the fquire; "then I am refolved to have the beft creature living in my coach;" and fo faying, he ordered it to ftop, whilft Jofeph, at his requeft, hallowed to the parfon, who, well knowing his voice, made all the hafte imaginable, and foon came up with them. He was defired by the mafter, who could fcarce refrain from laughter at his figure, to mount into the coach, which he with many thanks refufed, faying he could walk by its fide, and he'd warrant he kept up with it; but he was at length over-prevailed on. The fquire now acquainted Jofeph with his marriage; but he might have fpared himfelf that labour; for his fervant, whilft Jofeph was dreffing, had performed that office before. He continued to exprefs the vaft happinefs he enjoyed in his fifter, and the value he had for all who belonged to her. Jofeph made many bows, and expreft as many acknowledgments: and parfon Adams, who now firft perceived Jofeph's new apparel, burft into tears with joy, and fell to rubbing his hands and fnapping his fingers as if he had been mad. They were now arrived at the Lady Booby's, and the fquire, defiring them to wait a moment in the court, walked in to his aunt, and calling her out from his wife, acquainted her with Jofeph's arrival; faying, "Madam, as I have married a virtuous and worthy woman, I am refolved to own her relations, and fhow them all a proper refpect; I fhall think myfelf therefore infinitely obliged to all mine who will do the fame. It is true, her brother hath been your fervant, but he is now become my brother; and I have one happinefs, that neither his character, his behaviour, or appearance, give me any reafon to be afhamed of calling him fo. In fhort, he is now below, dreffed like a gentleman, in which light I intend he fhall hereafter be feen; and you will oblige me beyond expreffion if you will admit him to be of our party; for I know it will give great pleafure to my wife, though fhe will not mention it." This was a ftroke of fortune beyond the Lady Booby's hopes or expectation; fhe anfwered him eagerly, "Nephew, you know how eafily I am prevailed on to do anything which Jofeph Andrews defires--Phoo, I mean which you defire me; and, as he is now your relation, I cannot refufe to entertain him as fuch." The fquire told her he knew his obligation to her for her compliance; and going three fteps, returned and told her--he had one more favour, which he believed fhe would eafily grant, as fhe had accorded him the former. "There is a young woman--"--"Nephew," fays fhe, "don't let my good-nature make you defire, as is too commonly the cafe, to impofe on me. Nor think, becaufe I have with fo much condefcenfion agreed to fuffer your brother-in-law to come to my table, that I will fubmit to the company of all my own fervants, and all the dirty trollops in the country." "Madam," anfwered the fquire, "I believe you never faw this young creature. I never beheld fuch fweetnefs and innocence joined with fuch beauty, and withal fo genteel." "Upon my foul I won't admit her," replied the lady in a paffion; "the whole world fhan't prevail on me; I refent even the defire as an affront, and--" The fquire, who knew her inflexibility, interrupted her, by afking pardon, and promifing not to mention it more. He then returned to Jofeph, and fhe to Pamela. He took Jofeph afide, and told him he would carry him to his fifter, but could not prevail as yet for Fanny. Jofeph begged that he might fee his fifter alone, and then be with his Fanny; but the fquire, knowing the pleafure his wife would have in her brother's company, would not admit it, telling Jofeph there would be nothing in fo fhort an abfence from Fanny, whilft he was affured of her fafety; adding, he hoped he could not fo eafily quit a fifter whom he had not feen fo long, and who fo tenderly loved him. Jofeph immediately complied; for indeed no brother could love a fifter more; and, recommending Fanny, who rejoiced that fhe was not to go before Lady Booby, to the care of Mr Adams, he attended the fquire upftairs, whilft Fanny repaired with the parfon to his houfe, where fhe thought herfelf fecure of a kind reception. CHAPTER VI. _Of which you are defired to read no more than you like._ The meeting between Jofeph and Pamela was not without tears of joy on both fides; and their embraces were full of tendernefs and affection. They were, however, regarded with much more pleafure by the nephew than by the aunt, to whofe flame they were fuel only; and this was increafed by the addition of drefs, which was indeed not wanted to fet off the lively colours in which Nature had drawn health, ftrength, comelinefs, and youth. In the afternoon Jofeph, at their requeft, entertained them with an account of his adventures: nor could Lady Booby conceal her diffatiffaction at thofe parts in which Fanny was concerned, efpecially when Mr Booby launched forth into fuch rapturous praifes of her beauty. She faid, applying to her niece, that fhe wondered her nephew, who had pretended to marry for love, fhould think fuch a fubject proper to amufe his wife with; adding, that, for her part, fhe fhould be jealous of a hufband who fpoke fo warmly in praife of another woman. Pamela anfwered, indeed, fhe thought fhe had caufe; but it was an inftance of Mr Booby's aptnefs to fee more beauty in women than they were miftreffes of. At which words both the women fixed their eyes on two looking-glaffes; and Lady Booby replied, that men were, in the general, very ill judges of beauty; and then, whilft both contemplated only their own faces, they paid a crofs compliment to each other's charms. When the hour of reft approached, which the lady of the houfe deferred as long as decently fhe could, fhe informed Jofeph (whom for the future we fhall call Mr Jofeph, he having as good a title to that appellation as many others--I mean that incontefted one of good clothes) that fhe had ordered a bed to be provided for him. He declined this favour to his utmoft; for his heart had long been with his Fanny; but fhe infifted on his accepting it, alledging that the parifh had no proper accommodation for fuch a perfon as he was now to efteem himfelf. The fquire and his lady both joining with her, Mr Jofeph was at laft forced to give over his defign of vifiting Fanny that evening; who, on her fide, as impatiently expected him till midnight, when, in complacence to Mr Adams's family, who had fat up two hours out of refpect to her, fhe retired to bed, but not to fleep; the thoughts of her love kept her waking, and his not returning according to his promife filled her with uneafinefs; of which, however, fhe could not affign any other caufe than merely that of being abfent from him. Mr Jofeph rofe early in the morning, and vifited her in whom his foul delighted. She no fooner heard his voice in the parfon's parlour than fhe leapt from her bed, and, dreffing herfelf in a few minutes, went down to him. They paffed two hours with inexpreffible happinefs together; and then, having appointed Monday, by Mr Adams's permiffion, for their marriage, Mr Jofeph returned, according to his promife, to breakfaft at the Lady Booby's, with whofe behaviour, fince the evening, we fhall now acquaint the reader. She was no fooner retired to her chamber than fhe afked Slipflop "What fhe thought of this wonderful creature her nephew had married?"-- "Madam?" faid Slipflop, not yet fufficiently underftanding what anfwer fhe was to make. "I afk you," anfwered the lady, "what you think of the dowdy, my niece, I think I am to call her?" Slipflop, wanting no further hint, began to pull her to pieces, and fo miferably defaced her, that it would have been impoffible for any one to have known the perfon. The lady gave her all the affiftance fhe could, and ended with faying, "I think, Slipflop, you have done her juftice; but yet, bad as fhe is, fhe is an angel compared to this Fanny." Slipflop then fell on Fanny, whom fhe hacked and hewed in the like barbarous manner, concluding with an obfervation that there was always fomething in thofe low-life creatures which muft eternally extinguifh them from their betters. "Really," faid the lady, "I think there is one exception to your rule; I am certain you may guefs who I mean."--"Not I, upon my word, madam," faid Slipflop. "I mean a young fellow; fure you are the dulleft wretch," faid the lady. "O la! I am indeed. Yes, truly, madam, he is an acceffion," anfwered Slipflop. "Ay, is he not, Slipflop?" returned the lady. "Is he not fo genteel that a prince might, without a blufh, acknowledge him for his fon? His behaviour is fuch that would not fhame the beft education. He borrows from his ftation a condefcenfion in everything to his fuperiors, yet unattended by that mean fervility which is called good behaviour in fuch perfons. Everything he doth hath no mark of the bafe motive of fear, but vifibly fhows fome refpect and gratitude, and carries with it the perfuafion of love. And then for his virtues: fuch piety to his parents, fuch tender affection to his fifter, fuch integrity in his friendfhip, fuch bravery, fuch goodnefs, that, if he had been born a gentleman, his wife would have poffeffed the moft invaluable bleffing."--"To be fure, ma'am," fays Slipflop. "But as he is," anfwered the lady, "if he had a thoufand more good qualities, it muft render a woman of fafhion contemptible even to be fufpected of thinking of him; yes, I fhould defpife myfelf for fuch a thought."--"To be fure, ma'am," faid Slipflop. "And why to be fure?" replied the lady; "thou art always one's echo. Is he not more worthy of affection than a dirty country clown, though born of a family as old as the flood? or an idle worthlefs rake, or little puifny beau of quality? And yet thefe we muft condemn ourfelves to, in order to avoid the cenfure of the world; to fhun the contempt of others, we muft ally ourfelves to thofe we defpife; we muft prefer birth, title, and fortune, to real merit. It is a tyranny of cuftom, a tyranny we muft comply with; for we people of fafhion are the flaves of cuftom."--"Marry come up!" faid Slipflop, who now knew well which party to take. "If I was a woman of your ladyfhip's fortune and quality, I would be a flave to nobody."--"Me," faid the lady; "I am fpeaking if a young woman of fafhion, who had feen nothing of the world, fhould happen to like fuch a fellow.--Me, indeed! I hope thou doft not imagine--"--"No, ma'am, to be fure," cries Slipflop. "No! what no?" cried the lady. "Thou art always ready to anfwer before thou haft heard one. So far I muft allow he is a charming fellow. Me, indeed! No, Slipflop, all thoughts of men are over with me. I have loft a hufband who--but if I fhould reflect I fhould run mad. My future eafe muft depend upon forgetfulnefs. Slipflop, let me hear fome of thy nonfenfe, to turn my thoughts another way. What doft thou think of Mr Andrews?"--"Why, I think," fays Slipflop, "he is the handfomeft, moft propereft man I ever faw; and if I was a lady of the greateft degree it would be well for fome folks. Your ladyfhip may talk of cuftom, if you pleafe: but I am confidous there is no more comparifon between young Mr Andrews and moft of the young gentlemen who come to your ladyfhip's houfe in London; a parcel of whipper-fnapper fparks: I would fooner marry our old parfon Adams. Never tell me what people fay, whilft I am happy in the arms of him I love. Some folks rail againft other folks becaufe other folks have what fome folks would be glad of."--"And fo," anfwered the lady, "if you was a woman of condition, you would really marry Mr Andrews?"--"Yes, I affure your ladyfhip," replied Slipflop, "if he would have me."--"Fool, idiot!" cries the lady; "if he would have a woman of fafhion! is that a queftion?"--"No, truly, madam," faid Slipflop, "I believe it would be none if Fanny was out of the way; and I am confidous, if I was in your ladyfhip's place, and liked Mr Jofeph Andrews, fhe fhould not ftay in the parifh a moment. I am fure lawyer Scout would fend her packing if your ladyfhip would but fay the word." This laft fpeech of Slipflop raifed a tempeft in the mind of her miftrefs. She feared Scout had betrayed her, or rather that fhe had betrayed herfelf. After fome filence, and a double change of her complexion, firft to pale and then to red, fhe thus fpoke: "I am aftonifhed at the liberty you give your tongue. Would you infinuate that I employed Scout againft this wench on account of the fellow?"--"La, ma'am," faid Slipflop, frighted out of her wits, "I affaffinate fuch a thing!"--"I think you dare not," anfwered the lady; "I believe my conduct may defy malice itfelf to affert fo curfed a flander. If I had ever difcovered any wantonnefs, any lightnefs in my behaviour; if I had followed the example of fome whom thou haft, I believe, feen, in allowing myfelf indecent liberties, even with a hufband; but the dear man who is gone" (here fhe began to fob), "was he alive again" (then fhe produced tears), "could not upbraid me with any one act of tendernefs or paffion. No, Slipflop, all the time I cohabited with him he never obtained even a kifs from me without my expreffing reluctance in the granting it. I am fure he himfelf never fufpected how much I loved him. Since his death, thou knoweft, though it is almoft fix weeks (it wants but a day) ago, I have not admitted one vifitor till this fool my nephew arrived. I have confined myfelf quite to one party of friends. And can fuch a conduct as this fear to be arraigned? To be accufed, not only of a paffion which I have always defpifed, but of fixing it on fuch an object, a creature fo much beneath my notice!"--"Upon my word, ma'am," fays Slipflop, "I do not underftand your ladyfhip; nor know I anything of the matter."--"I believe indeed thou doft not underftand me. Thofe are delicacies which exift only in fuperior minds; thy coarfe ideas cannot comprehend them. Thou art a low creature, of the Andrews breed, a reptile of a lower order, a weed that grows in the common garden of the creation."--"I affure your ladyfhip," fays Slipflop, whofe paffions were almoft of as high an order as her lady's, "I have no more to do with Common Garden than other folks. Really, your ladyfhip talks of fervants as if they were not born of the Chriftian fpecious. Servants have flefh and blood as well as quality; and Mr Andrews himfelf is a proof that they have as good, if not better. And for my own part, I can't perceive my dears[A] are coarfer than other people's; and I am fure, if Mr Andrews was a dear of mine, I fhould not be afhamed of him in company with gentlemen; for whoever hath feen him in his new clothes muft confefs he looks as much like a gentleman as anybody. Coarfe, quotha! I can't bear to hear the poor young fellow run down neither; for I will fay this, I never heard him fay an ill word of anybody in his life. I am fure his coarfenefs doth not lie in his heart, for he is the beft-natured man in the world; and as for his fkin, it is no coarfer than other people's, I am fure. His bofom, when a boy, was as white as driven fnow; and, where it is not covered with hairs, is fo ftill. Ifakins! if I was Mrs Andrews, with a hundred a year, I fhould not envy the beft fhe who wears a head. A woman that could not be happy with fuch a man ought never to be fo; for if he can't make a woman happy, I never yet beheld the man who could. I fay again, I wifh I was a great lady for his fake. I believe, when I had made a gentleman of him, he'd behave fo that nobody fhould deprecate what I had done; and I fancy few would venture to tell him he was no gentleman to his face, nor to mine neither." At which words, taking up the candles, fhe afked her miftrefs, who had been fome time in her bed, if fhe had any farther commands? who mildly anfwered, fhe had none; and, telling her fhe was a comical creature, bid her good-night. [A] Meaning perhaps ideas. CHAPTER VII. _Philofophical reflections, the like not to be found in any light French romance. Mr Booby's grave advice to Jofeph, and Fanny's encounter with a beau._ Habit, my good reader, hath fo vaft a prevalence over the human mind, that there is fcarce anything too ftrange or too ftrong to be afferted of it. The ftory of the mifer, who, from long accuftoming to cheat others, came at laft to cheat himfelf, and with great delight and triumph picked his own pocket of a guinea to convey to his hoard, is not impoffible or improbable. In like manner it fares with the practifers of deceit, who, from having long deceived their acquaintance, gain at laft a power of deceiving themfelves, and acquire that very opinion (however falfe) of their own abilities, excellencies, and virtues, into which they have for years perhaps endeavoured to betray their neighbours. Now, reader, to apply this obfervation to my prefent purpofe, thou muft know, that as the paffion generally called love exercifes moft of the talents of the female or fair world, fo in this they now and then difcover a fmall inclination to deceit; for which thou wilt not be angry with the beautiful creatures when thou haft confidered that at the age of feven, or fomething earlier, mifs is inftructed by her mother that mafter is a very monftrous kind of animal, who will, if fhe fuffers him to come too near her, infallibly eat her up and grind her to pieces: that, fo far from kiffing or toying with him of her own accord, fhe muft not admit him to kifs or toy with her: and, laftly, that fhe muft never have any affection towards him; for if fhe fhould, all her friends in petticoats would efteem her a traitrefs, point at her, and hunt her out of their fociety. Thefe impreffions, being firft received, are farther and deeper inculcated by their fchool-miftreffes and companions; fo that by the age of ten they have contracted fuch a dread and abhorrence of the above-named monfter, that whenever they fee him they fly from him as the innocent hare doth from the greyhound. Hence, to the age of fourteen or fifteen, they entertain a mighty antipathy to mafter; they refolve, and frequently profefs, that they will never have any commerce with him, and entertain fond hopes of paffing their lives out of his reach, of the poffibility of which they have fo vifible an example in their good maiden aunt. But when they arrive at this period, and have now paffed their fecond climacteric, when their wifdom, grown riper, begins to fee a little farther, and, from almoft daily falling in mafter's way, to apprehend the great difficulty of keeping out of it; and when they obferve him look often at them, and fometimes very eagerly and earneftly too (for the monfter feldom takes any notice of them till at this age), they then begin to think of their danger; and, as they perceive they cannot eafily avoid him, the wifer part bethink themfelves of providing by other means for their fecurity. They endeavour, by all methods they can invent, to render themfelves fo amiable in his eyes, that he may have no inclination to hurt them; in which they generally fucceed fo well, that his eyes, by frequent languifhing, foon leffen their idea of his fiercenefs, and fo far abate their fears, that they venture to parley with him; and when they perceive him fo different from what he hath been defcribed, all gentlenefs, foftnefs, kindnefs, tendernefs, fondnefs, their dreadful apprehenfions vanifh in a moment; and now (it being ufual with the human mind to fkip from one extreme to its oppofite, as eafily, and almoft as fuddenly, as a bird from one bough to another) love inftantly fucceeds to fear: but, as it happens to perfons who have in their infancy been thoroughly frightened with certain no-perfons called ghofts, that they retain their dread of thofe beings after they are convinced that there are no fuch things, fo thefe young ladies, though they no longer apprehend devouring, cannot fo entirely fhake off all that hath been inftilled into them; they ftill entertain the idea of that cenfure which was fo ftrongly imprinted on their tender minds, to which the declarations of abhorrence they every day hear from their companions greatly contribute. To avoid this cenfure, therefore, is now their only care; for which purpofe they ftill pretend the fame averfion to the monfter: and the more they love him, the more ardently they counterfeit the antipathy. By the continual and conftant practice of which deceit on others, they at length impofe on themfelves, and really believe they hate what they love. Thus, indeed, it happened to Lady Booby, who loved Jofeph long before fhe knew it; and now loved him much more than fhe fufpected. She had indeed, from the time of his fifter's arrival in the quality of her niece, and from the inftant fhe viewed him in the drefs and character of a gentleman, began to conceive fecretly a defign which love had concealed from herfelf till a dream betrayed it to her. She had no fooner rifen than fhe fent for her nephew. When he came to her, after many compliments on his choice, fhe told him, "He might perceive, in her condefcenfion to admit her own fervant to her table, that fhe looked on the family of Andrews as his relations, and indeed hers; that, as he had married into fuch a family, it became him to endeavour by all methods to raife it as much as poffible. At length fhe advifed him to ufe all his heart to diffuade Jofeph from his intended match, which would ftill enlarge their relation to meannefs and poverty; concluding that, by a commiffion in the army, or fome other genteel employment, he might foon put young Mr Andrews on the foot of a gentleman; and, that being once done, his accomplifhments might quickly gain him an alliance which would not be to their difcredit." Her nephew heartily embraced this propofal, and, finding Mr Jofeph with his wife, at his return to her chamber, he immediately began thus: "My love to my dear Pamela, brother, will extend to all her relations; nor fhall I fhow them lefs refpect than if I had married into the family of a duke. I hope I have given you fome early teftimonies of this, and fhall continue to give you daily more. You will excufe me therefore, brother, if my concern for your intereft makes me mention what may be, perhaps, difagreeable to you to hear: but I muft infift upon it, that, if you have any value for my alliance or my friendfhip, you will decline any thoughts of engaging farther with a girl who is, as you are a relation of mine, fo much beneath you. I know there may be at firft fome difficulty in your compliance, but that will daily diminifh; and you will in the end fincerely thank me for my advice. I own, indeed, the girl is handfome; but beauty alone is a poor ingredient, and will make but an uncomfortable marriage."--"Sir," faid Jofeph, "I affure you her beauty is her leaft perfection; nor do I know a virtue which that young creature is not poffefft of."--"As to her virtues," anfwered Mr Booby, "you can be yet but a flender judge of them; but, if fhe had never fo many, you will find her equal in thefe among her fuperiors in birth and fortune, which now you are to efteem on a footing with yourfelf; at leaft I will take care they fhall fhortly be fo, unlefs you prevent me by degrading yourfelf with fuch a match, a match I have hardly patience to think of, and which would break the hearts of your parents, who now rejoice in the expectation of feeing you make a figure in the world."--"I know not," replied Jofeph, "that my parents have any power over my inclinations; nor am I obliged to facrifice my happinefs to their whim or ambition: befides, I fhall be very forry to fee that the unexpected advancement of my fifter fhould fo fuddenly infpire them with this wicked pride, and make them defpife their equals. I am refolved on no account to quit my dear Fanny; no, though I could raife her as high above her prefent ftation as you have raifed my fifter."--"Your fifter, as well as myfelf," faid Booby, "are greatly obliged to you for the comparifon: but, fir, fhe is not worthy to be compared in beauty to my Pamela; nor hath fhe half her merit. And befides, fir, as you civilly throw my marriage with your fifter in my teeth, I muft teach you the wide difference between us: my fortune enabled me to pleafe myfelf; and it would have been as overgrown a folly in me to have omitted it as in you to do it."--"My fortune enables me to pleafe myfelf likewife," faid Jofeph; "for all my pleafure is centered in Fanny; and whilft I have health I fhall be able to fupport her with my labour in that ftation to which fhe was born, and with which fhe is content."--"Brother," faid Pamela, "Mr Booby advifes you as a friend; and no doubt my papa and mamma will be of his opinion, and will have great reafon to be angry with you for deftroying what his goodnefs hath done, and throwing down our family again, after he hath raifed it. It would become you better, brother, to pray for the affiftance of grace againft fuch a paffion than to indulge it."--"Sure, fifter, you are not in earneft; I am fure fhe is your equal, at leaft."--"She was my equal," anfwered Pamela; "but I am no longer Pamela Andrews; I am now this gentleman's lady, and, as fuch, am above her.--I hope I fhall never behave with an unbecoming pride: but, at the fame time, I fhall always endeavour to know myfelf, and queftion not the affiftance of grace to that purpofe." They were now fummoned to breakfaft, and thus ended their difcourfe for the prefent, very little to the fatiffaction of any of the parties. Fanny was now walking in an avenue at fome diftance from the houfe, where Jofeph had promifed to take the firft opportunity of coming to her. She had not a fhilling in the world, and had fubfifted ever fince her return entirely on the charity of parfon Adams. A young gentleman, attended by many fervants, came up to her, and afked her if that was not the Lady Booby's houfe before him? This, indeed, he well knew; but had framed the queftion for no other reafon than to make her look up, and difcover if her face was equal to the delicacy of her fhape. He no fooner faw it than he was ftruck with amazement. He ftopt his horfe, and fwore fhe was the moft beautiful creature he ever beheld. Then, inftantly alighting and delivering his horfe to his fervant, he rapt out half-a-dozen oaths that he would kifs her; to which fhe at firft fubmitted, begging he would not be rude; but he was not fatiffied with the civility of a falute, nor even with the rudeft attack he could make on her lips, but caught her in his arms, and endeavoured to kifs her breafts, which with all her ftrength fhe refifted, and, as our fpark was not of the Herculean race, with fome difficulty prevented. The young gentleman, being foon out of breath in the ftruggle, quitted her, and, remounting his horfe, called one of his fervants to him, whom he ordered to ftay behind with her, and make her any offers whatever to prevail on her to return home with him in the evening; and to affure her he would take her into keeping. He then rode on with his other fervants, and arrived at the lady's houfe, to whom he was a diftant relation, and was come to pay a vifit. The trufty fellow, who was employed in an office he had been long accuftomed to, difcharged his part with all the fidelity and dexterity imaginable, but to no purpofe. She was entirely deaf to his offers, and rejected them with the utmoft difdain. At laft the pimp, who had perhaps more warm blood about him than his mafter, began to follicit for himfelf; he told her, though he was a fervant, he was a man of fome fortune, which he would make her miftrefs of; and this without any infult to her virtue, for that he would marry her. She anfwered, if his mafter himfelf, or the greateft lord in the land, would marry her, fhe would refufe him. At laft, being weary with perfuafions, and on fire with charms which would have almoft kindled a flame in the bofom of an ancient philofopher or modern divine, he faftened his horfe to the ground, and attacked her with much more force than the gentleman had exerted. Poor Fanny would not have been able to refift his rudenefs a fhort time, but the deity who prefides over chafte love fent her Jofeph to her affiftance. He no fooner came within fight, and perceived her ftruggling with a man, than, like a cannon-ball, or like lightning, or anything that is fwifter, if anything be, he ran towards her, and, coming up juft as the ravifher had torn her handkerchief from her breaft, before his lips had touched that feat of innocence and blifs, he dealt him fo lufty a blow in that part of his neck which a rope would have become with the utmoft propriety, that the fellow ftaggered backwards, and, perceiving he had to do with fomething rougher than the little, tender, trembling hand of Fanny, he quitted her, and, turning about, faw his rival, with fire flafhing from his eyes, again ready to affail him; and, indeed, before he could well defend himfelf, or return the firft blow, he received a fecond, which, had it fallen on that part of the ftomach to which it was directed, would have been probably the laft he would have had any occafion for; but the ravifher, lifting up his hand, drove the blow upwards to his mouth, whence it diflodged three of his teeth; and now, not conceiving any extraordinary affection for the beauty of Jofeph's perfon, nor being extremely pleafed with this method of falutation, he collected all his force, and aimed a blow at Jofeph's breaft, which he artfully parried with one fift, fo that it loft its force entirely in air; and, ftepping one foot backward, he darted his fift fo fiercely at his enemy, that, had he not caught it in his hand (for he was a boxer of no inferior fame), it muft have tumbled him on the ground. And now the ravifher meditated another blow, which he aimed at that part of the breaft where the heart is lodged; Jofeph did not catch it as before, yet fo prevented its aim that it fell directly on his nofe, but with abated force. Jofeph then, moving both fift and foot forwards at the fame time, threw his head fo dexteroufly into the ftomach of the ravifher that he fell a lifelefs lump on the field, where he lay many minutes breathlefs and motionlefs. When Fanny faw her Jofeph receive a blow in his face, and blood running in a ftream from him, fhe began to tear her hair and invoke all human and divine power to his affiftance. She was not, however, long under this affliction before Jofeph, having conquered his enemy, ran to her, and affured her he was not hurt; fhe then inftantly fell on her knees, and thanked God that he had made Jofeph the means of her refcue, and at the fame time preferved him from being injured in attempting it. She offered, with her handkerchief, to wipe his blood from his face; but he, feeing his rival attempting to recover his legs, turned to him, and afked him if he had enough? To which the other anfwered he had; for he believed he had fought with the devil inftead of a man; and, loofening his horfe, faid he fhould not have attempted the wench if he had known fhe had been fo well provided for. Fanny now begged Jofeph to return with her to parfon Adams, and to promife that he would leave her no more. Thefe were propofitions fo agreeable to Jofeph, that, had he heard them, he would have given an immediate affent; but indeed his eyes were now his only fenfe; for you may remember, reader, that the ravifher had tore her handkerchief from Fanny's neck, by which he had difcovered fuch a fight, that Jofeph hath declared all the ftatues he ever beheld were fo much inferior to it in beauty, that it was more capable of converting a man into a ftatue than of being imitated by the greateft mafter of that art. This modeft creature, whom no warmth in fummer could ever induce to expofe her charms to the wanton fun, a modefty to which, perhaps, they owed their inconceivable whitenefs, had ftood many minutes bare-necked in the prefence of Jofeph before her apprehenfion of his danger and the horror of feeing his blood would fuffer her once to reflect on what concerned herfelf; till at laft, when the caufe of her concern had vanifhed, an admiration at his filence, together with obferving the fixed pofition of his eyes, produced an idea in the lovely maid which brought more blood into her face than had flowed from Jofeph's noftrils. The fnowy hue of her bofom was likewife changed to vermilion at the inftant when fhe clapped her handkerchief round her neck. Jofeph faw the uneafinefs fhe fuffered, and immediately removed his eyes from an object, in furveying which he had felt the greateft delight which the organs of fight were capable of conveying to his foul;--fo great was his fear of offending her, and fo truly did his paffion for her deferve the noble name of love. Fanny, being recovered from her confufion, which was almoft equalled by what Jofeph had felt from obferving it, again mentioned her requeft; this was inftantly and gladly complied with; and together they croffed two or three fields, which brought them to the habitation of Mr Adams. CHAPTER VIII. _A difcourfe which happened between Mr Adams, Mrs Adams, Jofeph, and Fanny; with fome behaviour of Mr Adams which will be called by fome few readers very low, abfurd, and unnatural._ The parfon and his wife had juft ended a long difpute when the lovers came to the door. Indeed, this young couple had been the fubject of the difpute; for Mrs Adams was one of thofe prudent people who never do anything to injure their families, or, perhaps, one of thofe good mothers who would even ftretch their confcience to ferve their children. She had long entertained hopes of feeing her eldeft daughter fucceed Mrs Slipflop, and of making her fecond fon an excifeman by Lady Booby's intereft. Thefe were expectations fhe could not endure the thoughts of quitting, and was, therefore, very uneafy to fee her hufband fo refolute to oppofe the lady's intention in Fanny's affair. She told him, "It behoved every man to take the firft care of his family; that he had a wife and fix children, the maintaining and providing for whom would be bufinefs enough for him without intermeddling in other folks' affairs; that he had always preached up fubmiffion to fuperiors, and would do ill to give an example of the contrary behaviour in his own conduct; that if Lady Booby did wrong fhe muft anfwer for it herfelf, and the fin would not lie at their door; that Fanny had been a fervant, and bred up in the lady's own family, and confequently fhe muft have known more of her than they did, and it was very improbable, if fhe had behaved herfelf well, that the lady would have been fo bitterly her enemy; that perhaps he was too much inclined to think well of her becaufe fhe was handfome, but handfome women were often no better than they fhould be; that G-- made ugly women as well as handfome ones; and that if a woman had virtue it fignified nothing whether fhe had beauty or no." For all which reafons fhe concluded he fhould oblige the lady, and ftop the future publication of the banns. But all thefe excellent arguments had no effect on the parfon, who perfifted in doing his duty without regarding the confequence it might have on his worldly intereft. He endeavoured to anfwer her as well as he could; to which fhe had juft finifhed her reply (for fhe had always the laft word everywhere but at church) when Jofeph and Fanny entered their kitchen, where the parfon and his wife then fat at breakfaft over fome bacon and cabbage. There was a coldnefs in the civility of Mrs Adams which perfons of accurate fpeculation might have obferved, but efcaped her prefent guefts; indeed, it was a good deal covered by the heartinefs of Adams, who no fooner heard that Fanny had neither eat nor drank that morning than he prefented her a bone of bacon he had juft been gnawing, being the only remains of his provifion, and then ran nimbly to the tap, and produced a mug of fmall beer, which he called ale; however, it was the beft in his houfe. Jofeph, addreffing himfelf to the parfon, told him the difcourfe which had paft between Squire Booby, his fifter, and himfelf concerning Fanny; he then acquainted him with the dangers whence he had refcued her, and communicated fome apprehenfions on her account. He concluded that he fhould never have an eafy moment till Fanny was abfolutely his, and begged that he might be fuffered to fetch a licence, faying he could eafily borrow the money. The parfon anfwered, That he had already given his fentiments concerning a licence, and that a very few days would make it unneceffary. "Jofeph," fays he, "I wifh this hafte doth not arife rather from your impatience than your fear; but, as it certainly fprings from one of thefe caufes, I will examine both. Of each of thefe therefore in their turn; and firft for the firft of thefe, namely, impatience. Now, child, I muft inform you that, if in your purpofed marriage with this young woman you have no intention but the indulgence of carnal appetites, you are guilty of a very heinous fin. Marriage was ordained for nobler purpofes, as you will learn when you hear the fervice provided on that occafion read to you. Nay, perhaps, if you are a good lad, I, child, fhall give you a fermon gratis, wherein I fhall demonftrate how little regard ought to be had to the flefh on fuch occafions. The text will be Matthew the 5th, and part of the 28th verfe--_Whofoever looketh on a woman, fo as to luft after her_. The latter part I fhall omit, as foreign to my purpofe. Indeed, all fuch brutal lufts and affections are to be greatly fubdued, if not totally eradicated, before the veffel can be faid to be confecrated to honour. To marry with a view of gratifying thofe inclinations is a proftitution of that holy ceremony, and muft entail a curfe on all who fo lightly undertake it. If, therefore, this hafte arifes from impatience, you are to correct, and not give way to it. Now, as to the fecond head which I propofed to fpeak to, namely, fear: it argues a diffidence, highly criminal, of that Power in which alone we fhould put our truft, feeing we may be well affured that he is able, not only to defeat the defigns of our enemies, but even to turn their hearts. Inftead of taking, therefore, any unjuftifiable or defperate means to rid ourfelves of fear, we fhould refort to prayer only on thefe occafions; and we may be then certain of obtaining what is beft for us. When any accident threatens us we are not to defpair, nor, when it overtakes us, to grieve; we muft fubmit in all things to the will of Providence, and fet our affections fo much on nothing here that we cannot quit it without reluctance. You are a young man, and can know but little of this world; I am older, and have feen a great deal. All paffions are criminal in their excefs; and even love itfelf, if it is not fubfervient to our duty, may render us blind to it. Had Abraham fo loved his fon Ifaac as to refufe the facrifice required, is there any of us who would not condemn him? Jofeph, I know your many good qualities, and value you for them; but, as I am to render an account of your foul, which is committed to my cure, I cannot fee any fault without reminding you of it. You are too much inclined to paffion, child, and have fet your affections fo abfolutely on this young woman, that, if G-- required her at your hands, I fear you would reluctantly part with her. Now, believe me, no Chriftian ought fo to fet his heart on any perfon or thing in this world, but that, whenever it fhall be required or taken from him in any manner by Divine Providence, he may be able, peaceably, quietly, and contentedly to refign it." At which words one came haftily in, and acquainted Mr Adams that his youngeft fon was drowned. He ftood filent a moment, and foon began to ftamp about the room and deplore his lofs with the bittereft agony. Jofeph, who was overwhelmed with concern likewife, recovered himfelf fufficiently to endeavour to comfort the parfon; in which attempt he ufed many arguments that he had at feveral times remembered out of his own difcourfes, both in private and public (for he was a great enemy to the paffions, and preached nothing more than the conqueft of them by reafon and grace), but he was not at leifure now to hearken to his advice. "Child, child," faid he, "do not go about impoffibilities. Had it been any other of my children I could have borne it with patience; but my little prattler, the darling and comfort of my old age--the little wretch, to be fnatched out of life juft at his entrance into it; the fweeteft, beft-tempered boy, who never did a thing to offend me. It was but this morning I gave him his firft leffon in _Que Genus_. This was the very book he learnt; poor child! it is of no further ufe to thee now. He would have made the beft fcholar, and have been an ornament to the Church;--fuch parts and fuch goodnefs never met in one fo young." "And the handfomeft lad too," fays Mrs Adams, recovering from a fwoon in Fanny's arms. "My poor Jacky, fhall I never fee thee more?" cries the parfon. "Yes, furely," fays Jofeph, "and in a better place; you will meet again, never to part more." I believe the parfon did not hear thefe words, for he paid little regard to them, but went on lamenting, whilft the tears trickled down into his bofom. At laft he cried out, "Where is my little darling?" and was fallying out, when to his great furprize and joy, in which I hope the reader will fympathize, he met his fon in a wet condition indeed, but alive and running towards him. The perfon who brought the news of his miffortune had been a little too eager, as people fometimes are, from, I believe, no very good principle, to relate ill news; and, feeing him fall into the river, inftead of running to his affiftance, directly ran to acquaint his father of a fate which he had concluded to be inevitable, but whence the child was relieved by the fame poor pedlar who had relieved his father before from a lefs diftrefs. The parfon's joy was now as extravagant as his grief had been before; he kiffed and embraced his fon a thoufand times, and danced about the room like one frantic; but as foon as he difcovered the face of his old friend the pedlar, and heard the frefh obligation he had to him, what were his fenfations? not thofe which two courtiers feel in one another's embraces; not thofe with which a great man receives the vile treacherous engines of his wicked purpofes, not thofe with which a worthlefs younger brother wifhes his elder joy of a fon, or a man congratulates his rival on his obtaining a miftrefs, a place, or an honour.--No, reader; he felt the ebullition, the overflowings of a full, honeft, open heart, towards the perfon who had conferred a real obligation, and of which, if thou canft not conceive an idea within, I will not vainly endeavour to affift thee. When thefe tumults were over, the parfon, taking Jofeph afide, proceeded thus--"No, Jofeph, do not give too much way to thy paffions, if thou doft expect happinefs." The patience of Jofeph, nor perhaps of Job, could bear no longer; he interrupted the parfon, faying, "It was eafier to give advice than take it; nor did he perceive he could fo entirely conquer himfelf, when he apprehended he had loft his fon, or when he found him recovered."--"Boy," replied Adams, raifing his voice, "it doth not become green heads to advife grey hairs.--Thou art ignorant of the tendernefs of fatherly affection; when thou art a father thou wilt be capable then only of knowing what a father can feel. No man is obliged to impoffibilities; and the lofs of a child is one of thofe great trials where our grief may be allowed to become immoderate."--"Well, fir," cries Jofeph, "and if I love a miftrefs as well as you your child, furely her lofs would grieve me equally."--"Yes, but fuch love is foolifhnefs and wrong in itfelf, and ought to be conquered," anfwered Adams; "it favours too much of the flefh."--"Sure, fir," fays Jofeph, "it is not finful to love my wife, no, not even to doat on her to diftraction!"--"Indeed but it is," fays Adams. "Every man ought to love his wife, no doubt; we are commanded fo to do; but we ought to love her with moderation and difcretion."--"I am afraid I fhall be guilty of fome fin in fpite of all my endeavours," fays Jofeph; "for I fhall love without any moderation, I am fure."--"You talk foolifhly and childifhly," cries Adams.--"Indeed," fays Mrs Adams, who had liftened to the latter part of their converfation, "you talk more foolifhly yourfelf. I hope, my dear, you will never preach any fuch doctrine as that hufbands can love their wives too well. If I knew you had fuch a fermon in the houfe I am fure I would burn it, and I declare, if I had not been convinced you had loved me as well as you could, I can anfwer for myfelf, I fhould have hated and defpifed you. Marry come up! Fine doctrine, indeed! A wife hath a right to infift on her hufband's loving her as much as ever he can; and he is a finful villain who doth not. Doth he not promife to love her, and to comfort her, and to cherifh her, and all that? I am fure I remember it all as well as if I had repeated it over but yefterday, and fhall never forget it. Befides, I am certain you do not preach as you practife; for you have been a loving and a cherifhing hufband to me; that's the truth on't; and why you fhould endeavour to put fuch wicked nonfenfe into this young man's head I cannot devife. Don't hearken to him, Mr Jofeph; be as good a hufband as you are able, and love your wife with all your body and foul too." Here a violent rap at the door put an end to their difcourfe, and produced a fcene which the reader will find in the next chapter. CHAPTER IX. _A vifit which the polite Lady Booby and her polite friend paid to the parfon._ The Lady Booby had no fooner had an account from the gentleman of his meeting a wonderful beauty near her houfe, and perceived the raptures with which he fpoke of her, than, immediately concluding it muft be Fanny, fhe began to meditate a defign of bringing them better acquainted; and to entertain hopes that the fine clothes, prefents, and promifes of this youth, would prevail on her to abandon Jofeph: fhe therefore propofed to her company a walk in the fields before dinner, when fhe led them towards Mr Adams's houfe; and, as fhe approached it, told them if they pleafed fhe would divert them with one of the moft ridiculous fights they had ever feen, which was an old foolifh parfon, who, fhe faid, laughing, kept a wife and fix brats on a falary of about twenty pounds a year; adding, that there was not fuch another ragged family in the parifh. They all readily agreed to this vifit, and arrived whilft Mrs Adams was declaiming as in the laft chapter. Beau Didapper, which was the name of the young gentleman we have feen riding towards Lady Booby's, with his cane mimicked the rap of a London footman at the door. The people within, namely, Adams, his wife and three children, Jofeph, Fanny, and the pedlar, were all thrown into confufion by this knock, but Adams went directly to the door, which being opened, the Lady Booby and her company walked in, and were received by the parfon with about two hundred bows, and by his wife with as many curtfies; the latter telling the lady "She was afhamed to be feen in fuch a pickle, and that her houfe was in fuch a litter; but that if fhe had expected fuch an honour from her ladyfhip fhe fhould have found her in a better manner." The parfon made no apologies, though he was in his half-caffock and a flannel nightcap. He faid "They were heartily welcome to his poor cottage," and turning to Mr Didapper, cried out, "_Non mea renidet in domo lacunar_." The beau anfwered, "He did not underftand Welfh;" at which the parfon ftared and made no reply. Mr Didapper, or beau Didapper, was a young gentleman of about four foot five inches in height. He wore his own hair, though the fcarcity of it might have given him fufficient excufe for a periwig. His face was thin and pale; the fhape of his body and legs none of the beft, for he had very narrow fhoulders and no calf; and his gait might more properly be called hopping than walking. The qualifications of his mind were well adapted to his perfon. We fhall handle them firft negatively. He was not entirely ignorant; for he could talk a little French and fing two or three Italian fongs; he had lived too much in the world to be bafhful, and too much at court to be proud: he feemed not much inclined to avarice, for he was profufe in his expenfes; nor had he all the features of prodigality, for he never gave a fhilling: no hater of women, for he always dangled after them; yet fo little fubject to luft, that he had, among thofe who knew him beft, the character of great moderation in his pleafures; no drinker of wine; nor fo addicted to paffion but that a hot word or two from an adverfary made him immediately cool. Now, to give him only a dafh or two on the affirmative fide: though he was born to an immenfe fortune, he chofe, for the pitiful and dirty confideration of a place of little confequence, to depend entirely on the will of a fellow whom they call a great man; who treated him with the utmoft difrefpect, and exacted of him a plenary obedience to his commands, which he implicitly fubmitted to, at the expenfe of his confcience, his honour, and of his country, in which he had himfelf fo very large a fhare. And to finifh his character; as he was entirely well fatiffied with his own perfon and parts, fo he was very apt to ridicule and laugh at any imperfection in another. Such was the little perfon, or rather thing, that hopped after Lady Booby into Mr Adams's kitchen. The parfon and his company retreated from the chimney-fide, where they had been feated, to give room to the lady and hers. Inftead of returning any of the curtfies or extraordinary civility of Mrs Adams, the lady, turning to Mr Booby, cried out, "_Quelle Bte! Quel Animal!_" And prefently after difcovering Fanny (for fhe did not need the circumftance of her ftanding by Jofeph to affure the identity of her perfon), fhe afked the beau "Whether he did not think her a pretty girl?"--"Begad, madam," anfwered he, "'tis the very fame I met." "I did not imagine," replied the lady, "you had fo good a tafte."--"Becaufe I never liked you, I warrant," cries the beau. "Ridiculous!" faid fhe: "you know you was always my averfion." "I would never mention averfion," anfwered the beau, "with that face[A]; dear Lady Booby, wafh your face before you mention averfion, I befeech you." He then laughed, and turned about to coquet it with Fanny. [A] Left this fhould appear unnatural to fome readers, we think proper to acquaint them, that it is taken verbatim from very polite converfation. Mrs Adams had been all this time begging and praying the ladies to fit down, a favour which fhe at laft obtained. The little boy to whom the accident had happened, ftill keeping his place by the fire, was chid by his mother for not being more mannerly: but Lady Booby took his part, and, commending his beauty, told the parfon he was his very picture. She then, feeing a book in his hand, afked "If he could read?"--"Yes," cried Adams, "a little Latin, madam: he is juft got into Quae Genus."--"A fig for quere genius!" anfwered fhe; "let me hear him read a little Englifh."--"Lege, Dick, lege," faid Adams: but the boy made no anfwer, till he faw the parfon knit his brows, and then cried, "I don't underftand you, father."--"How, boy!" fays Adams; "what doth lego make in the imperative mood? Legito, doth it not?"--"Yes," anfwered Dick.--"And what befides ?" fays the father. "Lege," quoth the fon, after fome hefitation. "A good boy," fays the father: "and now, child, what is the Englifh of lego?"--To which the boy, after long puzzling, anfwered, he could not tell. "How!" cries Adams, in a paffion;--"what, hath the water wafhed away your learning? Why, what is Latin for the Englifh verb read? Confider before you fpeak." The child confidered fome time, and then the parfon cried twice or thrice, "Le--, Le--." Dick anfwered, "Lego."--"Very well;--and then what is the Englifh," fays the parfon, "of the verb lego?"--"To read," cried Dick.--"Very well," faid the parfon; "a good boy: you can do well if you will take pains.--I affure your ladyfhip he is not much above eight years old, and is out of his Propria quae Maribus already.--Come, Dick, read to her ladyfhip;"--which fhe again defiring, in order to give the beau time and opportunity with Fanny, Dick began as in the following chapter. CHAPTER X. _The hiftory of two friends, which may afford an ufeful leffon to all thofe perfons who happen to take up their refidence in married families._ "Leonard and Paul were two friends."--"Pronounce it Lennard, child," cried the parfon.--"Pray, Mr Adams," fays Lady Booby, "let your fon read without interruption." Dick then proceeded. "Lennard and Paul were two friends, who, having been educated together at the fame fchool, commenced a friendfhip which they preferved a long time for each other. It was fo deeply fixed in both their minds, that a long abfence, during which they had maintained no correfpondence, did not eradicate nor leffen it: but it revived in all its force at their firft meeting, which was not till after fifteen years' abfence, moft of which time Lennard had fpent in the Eaft Indi-es."--"Pronounce it fhort, Indies," fays Adams.--"Pray? fir, be quiet," fays the lady.--The boy repeated--"in the Eaft Indies, whilft Paul had ferved his king and country in the army. In which different fervices they had found fuch different fuccefs, that Lennard was now married, and retired with a fortune of thirty thoufand pounds; and Paul was arrived to the degree of a lieutenant of foot; and was not worth a fingle fhilling. "The regiment in which Paul was ftationed happened to be ordered into quarters within a fmall diftance from the eftate which Lennard had purchafed, and where he was fettled. This latter, who was now become a country gentleman, and a juftice of peace, came to attend the quarter feffions in the town where his old friend was quartered, foon after his arrival. Some affair in which a foldier was concerned occafioned Paul to attend the juftices. Manhood, and time, and the change of climate had fo much altered Lennard, that Paul did not immediately recollect the features of his old acquaintance: but it was otherwife with Lennard. He knew Paul the moment he faw him; nor could he contain himfelf from quitting the bench, and running haftily to embrace him. Paul ftood at firft a little furprized; but had foon fufficient information from his friend, whom he no fooner remembered than he returned his embrace with a paffion which made many of the fpectators laugh, and gave to fome few a much higher and more agreeable fenfation. "Not to detain the reader with minute circumftances, Lennard infifted on his friend's returning with him to his houfe that evening; which requeft was complied with, and leave for a month's abfence for Paul obtained of the commanding officer. "If it was poffible for any circumftance to give any addition to the happinefs which Paul propofed in this vifit, he received that additional pleafure by finding, on his arrival at his friend's houfe, that his lady was an old acquaintance which he had formerly contracted at his quarters, and who had always appeared to be of a moft agreeable temper; a character fhe had ever maintained among her intimates, being of that number, every individual of which is called quite the beft fort of woman in the world. "But, good as this lady was, fhe was ftill a woman; that is to fay, an angel, and not an angel."--"You muft miftake, child," cries the parfon, "for you read nonfenfe."--"It is fo in the book," anfwered the fon. Mr Adams was then filenced by authority, and Dick proceeded--"For though her perfon was of that kind to which men attribute the name of angel, yet in her mind fhe was perfectly woman. Of which a great degree of obftinacy gave the moft remarkable and perhaps moft pernicious inftance. "A day or two paffed after Paul's arrival before any inftances of this appeared; but it was impoffible to conceal it long. Both fhe and her hufband foon loft all apprehenfion from their friend's prefence, and fell to their difputes with as much vigour as ever. Thefe were ftill purfued with the utmoft ardour and eagernefs, however trifling the caufes were whence they firft arofe. Nay, however incredible it may feem, the little confequence of the matter in debate was frequently given as a reafon for the fiercenefs of the contention, as thus: 'If you loved me, fure you would never difpute with me fuch a trifle as this.' The anfwer to which is very obvious; for the argument would hold equally on both fides, and was conftantly retorted with fome addition, as--'I am fure I have much more reafon to fay fo, who am in the right.' During all thefe difputes, Paul always kept ftrict filence, and preferved an even countenance, without fhowing the leaft vifible inclination to either party. One day, however, when madam had left the room in a violent fury, Lennard could not refrain from referring his caufe to his friend. Was ever anything fo unreafonable, fays he, as this woman? What fhall I do with her? I doat on her to diftraction; nor have I any caufe to complain of, more than this obftinacy in her temper; whatever fhe afferts, fhe will maintain againft all the reafon and conviction in the world. Pray give me your advice.--Firft, fays Paul, I will give my opinion, which is, flatly, that you are in the wrong; for, fuppofing fhe is in the wrong, was the fubject of your contention any ways material? What fignified it whether you was married in a red or a yellow waiftcoat? for that was your difpute. Now, fuppofe fhe was miftaken; as you love her you fay fo tenderly, and I believe fhe deferves it, would it not have been wifer to have yielded, though you certainly knew yourfelf in the right, than to give either her or yourfelf any uneafinefs. For my own part, if ever I marry, I am refolved to enter into an agreement with my wife, that in all difputes (efpecially about trifles) that party who is moft convinced they are right fhall always furrender the victory; by which means we fhall both be forward to give up the caufe. I own, faid Lennard, my dear friend, fhaking him by the hand, there is great truth and reafon in what you fay; and I will for the future endeavour to follow your advice. They foon after broke up the converfation, and Lennard, going to his wife, afked her pardon, and told her his friend had convinced him he had been in the wrong. She immediately began a vaft encomium on Paul, in which he feconded her, and both agreed he was the worthieft and wifeft man upon earth. When next they met, which was at fupper, though fhe had promifed not to mention what her hufband told her, fhe could not forbear cafting the kindeft and moft affectionate looks on Paul, and afked him, with the fweeteft voice, whether fhe fhould help him to fome potted woodcock? Potted partridge, my dear, you mean, fays the hufband. My dear, fays fhe, I afk your friend if he will eat any potted woodcock; and I am fure I muft know, who potted it. I think I fhould know too, who fhot them, replied the hufband, and I am convinced that I have not feen a woodcock this year; however, though I know I am in the right, I fubmit, and the potted partridge is potted woodcock if you defire to have it fo. It is equal to me, fays fhe, whether it is one or the other; but you would perfuade one out of one's fenfes; to be fure, you are always in the right in your own opinion; but your friend, I believe, knows which he is eating. Paul anfwered nothing, and the difpute continued, as ufual, the greateft part of the evening. The next morning the lady, accidentally meeting Paul, and being convinced he was her friend, and of her fide, accofted him thus:--I am certain, fir, you have long fince wondered at the unreafonablenefs of my hufband. He is indeed, in other refpects, a good fort of man, but fo pofitive, that no woman but one of my complying temper could poffibly live with him. Why, laft night, now, was ever any creature fo unreafonable? I am certain you muft condemn him. Pray, anfwer me, was he not in the wrong? Paul, after a fhort filence, fpoke as follows: I am forry, madam, that, as good manners obliges me to anfwer againft my will, fo an adherence to truth forces me to declare myfelf of a different opinion. To be plain and honeft, you was entirely in the wrong; the caufe I own not worth difputing, but the bird was undoubtedly a partridge. O fir! replyed the lady, I cannot poffibly help your tafte. Madam, returned Paul, that is very little material; for, had it been otherwife, a hufband might have expected fubmiffion.--Indeed! fir, fays fhe, I affure you!--Yes, madam, cryed he, he might, from a perfon of your excellent underftanding; and pardon me for faying, fuch a condefcenfion would have fhown a fuperiority of fenfe even to your hufband himfelf.--But, dear fir, faid fhe, why fhould I fubmit when I am in the right?--For that very reafon, anfwered he; it would be the greateft inftance of affection imaginable; for can anything be a greater object of our compaffion than a perfon we love in the wrong? Ay, but I fhould endeavour, faid fhe, to fet him right. Pardon me, madam, anfwered Paul: I will apply to your own experience if you ever found your arguments had that effect. The more our judgments err, the lefs we are willing to own it: for my own part, I have always obferved the perfons who maintain the worft fide in any conteft are the warmeft. Why, fays fhe, I muft confefs there is truth in what you fay, and I will endeavour to practife it. The hufband then coming in, Paul departed. And Leonard, approaching his wife with an air of good humour, told her he was forry for their foolifh difpute the laft night; but he was now convinced of his error. She anfwered, fmiling, fhe believed fhe owed his condefcenfion to his complacence; that fhe was afhamed to think a word had paffed on fo filly an occafion, efpecially as fhe was fatiffyed fhe had been miftaken. A little contention followed, but with the utmoft good-will to each other, and was concluded by her afferting that Paul had thoroughly convinced her fhe had been in the wrong. Upon which they both united in the praifes of their common friend. "Paul now paffed his time with great fatiffaction, thefe difputes being much lefs frequent, as well as fhorter than ufual; but the devil, or fome unlucky accident in which perhaps the devil had no hand, fhortly put an end to his happinefs. He was now eternally the private referee of every difference; in which, after having perfectly, as he thought, eftablifhed the doctrine of fubmiffion, he never fcrupled to affure both privately that they were in the right in every argument, as before he had followed the contrary method. One day a violent litigation happened in his abfence, and both parties agreed to refer it to his decifion. The hufband profeffing himfelf fure the decifion would be in his favour; the wife anfwered, he might be miftaken; for fhe believed his friend was convinced how feldom fhe was to blame; and that if he knew all--The hufband replied, My dear, I have no defire of any retrofpect; but I believe, if you knew all too, you would not imagine my friend fo entirely on your fide. Nay, fays fhe, fince you provoke me, I will mention one inftance. You may remember our difpute about fending Jackey to fchool in cold weather, which point I gave up to you from mere compaffion, knowing myfelf to be in the right; and Paul himfelf told me afterwards he thought me fo. My dear, replied the hufband, I will not fcruple your veracity; but I affure you folemnly, on my applying to him, he gave it abfolutely on my fide, and faid he would have acted in the fame manner. They then proceeded to produce numberlefs other inftances, in all which Paul had, on vows of fecrefy, given his opinion on both fides. In the conclufion, both believing each other, they fell feverely on the treachery of Paul, and agreed that he had been the occafion of almoft every difpute which had fallen out between them. They then became extremely loving, and fo full of condefcenfion on both fides, that they vyed with each other in cenfuring their own conduct, and jointly vented their indignation on Paul, whom the wife, fearing a bloody confequence, earneftly entreated her hufband to fuffer quietly to depart the next day, which was the time fixed for his return to quarters, and then drop his acquaintance. "However ungenerous this behaviour in Lennard may be efteemed, his wife obtained a promife from him (though with difficulty) to follow her advice; but they both expreffed fuch unufual coldnefs that day to Paul, that he, who was quick of apprehenfion, taking Lennard afide, preffed him fo home, that he at laft difcovered the fecret. Paul acknowledged the truth, but told him the defign with which he had done it.--To which the other anfwered, he would have acted more friendly to have let him into the whole defign; for that he might have affured himfelf of his fecrefy. Paul replyed, with fome indignation, he had given him a fufficient proof how capable he was of concealing a fecret from his wife. Lennard returned with fome warmth--he had more reafon to upbraid him, for that he had caufed moft of the quarrels between them by his ftrange conduct, and might (if they had not difcovered the affair to each other) have been the occafion of their feparation. Paul then faid"--But fomething now happened which put a ftop to Dick's reading, and of which we fhall treat in the next chapter. CHAPTER XI. _In which the hiftory is continued._ Jofeph Andrews had borne with great uneafinefs the impertinence of beau Didapper to Fanny, who had been talking pretty freely to her, and offering her fettlements; but the refpect to the company had reftrained him from interfering whilft the beau confined himfelf to the ufe of his tongue only; but the faid beau, watching an opportunity whilft the ladies' eyes were difpofed another way, offered a rudenefs to her with his hands; which Jofeph no fooner perceived than he prefented him with fo found a box on the ear, that it conveyed him feveral paces from where he ftood. The ladies immediately fcreamed out, rofe from their chairs; and the beau, as foon as he recovered himfelf, drew his hanger: which Adams obferving, fnatched up the lid of a pot in his left hand, and, covering himfelf with it as with a fhield, without any weapon of offence in his other hand, ftept in before Jofeph, and expofed himfelf to the enraged beau, who threatened fuch perdition and deftruction, that it frighted the women, who were all got in a huddle together, out of their wits, even to hear his denunciations of vengeance. Jofeph was of a different complexion, and begged Adams to let his rival come on; for he had a good cudgel in his hand, and did not fear him. Fanny now fainted into Mrs Adams's arms, and the whole room was in confufion, when Mr Booby, paffing by Adams, who lay fnug under the pot-lid, came up to Didapper, and infifted on his fheathing the hanger, promifing he fhould have fatiffaction; which Jofeph declared he would give him, and fight him at any weapon whatever. The beau now fheathed his hanger, and taking out a pocket-glafs, and vowing vengeance all the time, re-adjufted his hair; the parfon depofited his fhield; and Jofeph, running to Fanny, foon brought her back to life. Lady Booby chid Jofeph for his infult on Didapper; but he anfwered, he would have attacked an army in the fame caufe. "What caufe?" faid the lady. "Madam," anfwered Jofeph, "he was rude to that young woman."--"What," fays the lady, "I fuppofe he would have kiffed the wench; and is a gentleman to be ftruck for fuch an offer? I muft tell you, Jofeph, thefe airs do not become you."--"Madam," faid Mr Booby, "I faw the whole affair, and I do not commend my brother; for I cannot perceive why he fhould take upon him to be this girl's champion."--"I can commend him," fays Adams: "he is a brave lad; and it becomes any man to be the champion of the innocent; and he muft be the bafeft coward who would not vindicate a woman with whom he is on the brink of marriage."--"Sir," fays Mr Booby, "my brother is not a proper match for fuch a young woman as this."--"No," fays Lady Booby; "nor do you, Mr Adams, act in your proper character by encouraging any fuch doings; and I am very much furprized you fhould concern yourfelf in it. I think your wife and family your properer care."--"Indeed, madam, your ladyfhip fays very true," anfwered Mrs Adams: "he talks a pack of nonfenfe, that the whole parifh are his children. I am fure I don't underftand what he means by it; it would make fome women fufpect he had gone aftray, but I acquit him of that; I can read Scripture as well as he, and I never found that the parfon was obliged to provide for other folks' children; and befides, he is but a poor curate, and hath little enough, as your ladyfhip knows, for me and mine."--"You fay very well, Mrs Adams," quoth the Lady Booby, who had not fpoke a word to her before; "you feem to be a very fenfible woman; and I affure you, your hufband is acting a very foolifh part, and oppofing his own intereft, feeing my nephew is violently fet againft this match: and indeed I can't blame him; it is by no means one fuitable to our family." In this manner the lady proceeded with Mrs Adams, whilft the beau hopped about the room, fhaking his head, partly from pain and partly from anger; and Pamela was chiding Fanny for her affurance in aiming at fuch a match as her brother. Poor Fanny anfwered only with her tears, which had long fince begun to wet her handkerchief; which Jofeph perceiving, took her by the arm, and wrapping it in his carried her off, fwearing he would own no relation to any one who was an enemy to her he loved more than all the world. He went out with Fanny under his left arm, brandifhing a cudgel in his right, and neither Mr Booby nor the beau thought proper to oppofe him. Lady Booby and her company made a very fhort ftay behind him; for the lady's bell now fummoned them to drefs; for which they had juft time before dinner. Adams feemed now very much dejected, which his wife perceiving, began to apply fome matrimonial balfam. She told him he had reafon to be concerned, for that he had probably ruined his family with his tricks almoft; but perhaps he was grieved for the lofs of his two children, Jofeph and Fanny. His eldeft daughter went on: "Indeed, father, it is very hard to bring ftrangers here to eat your children's bread out of their mouths. You have kept them ever fince they came home; and, for anything I fee to the contrary, may keep them a month longer; are you obliged to give her meat, tho'f fhe was never fo handfome? But I don't fee fhe is fo much handfomer than other people. If people were to be kept for their beauty, fhe would fcarce fare better than her neighbours, I believe. As for Mr Jofeph, I have nothing to fay; he is a young man of honeft principles, and will pay fome time or other for what he hath; but for the girl--why doth fhe not return to her place fhe ran away from? I would not give fuch a vagabond flut a halfpenny though I had a million of money; no, though fhe was ftarving." "Indeed but I would," cries little Dick; "and, father, rather than poor Fanny fhall be ftarved, I will give her all this bread and cheefe"--(offering what he held in his hand). Adams fmiled on the boy, and told him he rejoiced to fee he was a Chriftian; and that if he had a halfpenny in his pocket, he would have given it him; telling him it was his duty to look upon all his neighbours as his brothers and fifters, and love them accordingly. "Yes, papa," fays he, "I love her better than my fifters, for fhe is handfomer than any of them." "Is fhe fo, faucebox?" fays the fifter, giving him a box on the ear; which the father would probably have refented, had not Jofeph, Fanny, and the pedlar at that inftant returned together. Adams bid his wife prepare fome food for their dinner; fhe faid, "Truly fhe could not, fhe had fomething elfe to do." Adams rebuked her for difputing his commands, and quoted many texts of Scripture to prove "That the hufband is the head of the wife, and fhe is to fubmit and obey." The wife anfwered, "It was blafphemy to talk Scripture out of church; that fuch things were very proper to be faid in the pulpit, but that it was profane to talk them in common difcourfe." Jofeph told Mr Adams "He was not come with any defign to give him or Mrs Adams any trouble; but to defire the favour of all their company to the George (an ale-houfe in the parifh), where he had befpoke a piece of bacon and greens for their dinner." Mrs Adams, who was a very good fort of woman, only rather too ftrict in oeconomies, readily accepted this invitation, as did the parfon himfelf by her example; and away they all walked together, not omitting little Dick, to whom Jofeph gave a fhilling when he heard of his intended liberality to Fanny. CHAPTER XII. _Where the good-natured reader will fee fomething which will give him no great pleafure._ The pedlar had been very inquifitive from the time he had firft heard that the great houfe in this parifh belonged to the Lady Booby, and had learnt that fhe was the widow of Sir Thomas, and that Sir Thomas had bought Fanny, at about the age of three or four years, of a travelling woman; and, now their homely but hearty meal was ended, he told Fanny he believed he could acquaint her with her parents. The whole company, efpecially fhe herfelf, ftarted at this offer of the pedlar's. He then proceeded thus, while they all lent their ftricteft attention:--"Though I am now contented with this humble way of getting my livelihood, I was formerly a gentleman; for fo all thofe of my profeffion are called. In a word, I was a drummer in an Irifh regiment of foot. Whilft I was in this honourable ftation I attended an officer of our regiment into England a-recruiting. In our march from Briftol to Froome (for fince the decay of the woollen trade the clothing towns have furnifhed the army with a great number of recruits) we overtook on the road a woman, who feemed to be about thirty years old or thereabouts, not very handfome, but well enough for a foldier. As we came up to her, fhe mended her pace, and falling into difcourfe with our ladies (for every man of the party, namely, a ferjeant, two private men, and a drum, were provided with their woman except myfelf), fhe continued to travel on with us. I, perceiving fhe muft fall to my lot, advanced prefently to her, made love to her in our military way, and quickly fucceeded to my wifhes. We ftruck a bargain within a mile, and lived together as man and wife to her dying day." "I fuppofe," fays Adams, interrupting him, "you were married with a licence; for I don't fee how you could contrive to have the banns publifhed while you were marching from place to place." "No, fir," faid the pedlar, "we took a licence to go to bed together without any banns." "Ay! ay!" faid the parfon; "_ex neceffitate_, a licence may be allowable enough; but furely, furely, the other is the more regular and eligible way." The pedlar proceeded thus: "She returned with me to our regiment, and removed with us from quarters to quarters, till at laft, whilft we lay at Galloway, fhe fell ill of a fever and died. When fhe was on her death-bed fhe called me to her, and, crying bitterly, declared fhe could not depart this world without difcovering a fecret to me, which, fhe faid, was the only fin which fat heavy on her heart. She faid fhe had formerly travelled in a company of gypfies, who had made a practice of ftealing away children; that for her own part, fhe had been only once guilty of the crime; which, fhe faid, fhe lamented more than all the reft of her fins, fince probably it might have occafioned the death of the parents; for, added fhe, it is almoft impoffible to defcribe the beauty of the young creature, which was about a year and a half old when I kidnapped it. We kept her (for fhe was a girl) above two years in our company, when I fold her myfelf, for three guineas, to Sir Thomas Booby, in Somerfetfhire. Now, you know whether there are any more of that name in this county." "Yes," fays Adams, "there are feveral Boobys who are fquires, but I believe no baronet now alive; befides, it anfwers fo exactly in every point, there is no room for doubt; but you have forgot to tell us the parents from whom the child was ftolen." "Their name," anfwered the pedlar, "was Andrews. They lived about thirty miles from the fquire; and fhe told me that I might be fure to find them out by one circumftance; for that they had a daughter of a very ftrange name, Pamela, or Pam_e_la; fome pronounced it one way, and fome the other." Fanny, who had changed colour at the firft mention of the name, now fainted away; Jofeph turned pale, and poor Dicky began to roar; the parfon fell on his knees, and ejaculated many thankfgivings that this difcovery had been made before the dreadful fin of inceft was committed; and the pedlar was ftruck with amazement, not being able to account for all this confufion; the caufe of which was prefently opened by the parfon's daughter, who was the only unconcerned perfon (for the mother was chafing Fanny's temples, and taking the utmoft care of her): and, indeed, Fanny was the only creature whom the daughter would not have pitied in her fituation; wherein, though we compaffionate her ourfelves, we fhall leave her for a little while, and pay a fhort vifit to Lady Booby. CHAPTER XIII. _The hiftory, returning to the Lady Booby, gives fome account of the terrible conflict in her breaft between love and pride; with what happened on the prefent difcovery._ The lady fat down with her company to dinner, but eat nothing. As foon as her cloth was removed fhe whifpered Pamela that fhe was taken a little ill, and defired her to entertain her hufband and beau Didapper. She then went up into her chamber, fent for Slipflop, threw herfelf on the bed in the agonies of love, rage, and defpair; nor could fhe conceal thefe boiling paffions longer without burfting. Slipflop now approached her bed, and afked how her ladyfhip did; but, inftead of revealing her diforder, as fhe intended, fhe entered into a long encomium on the beauty and virtues of Jofeph Andrews; ending, at laft, with expreffing her concern that fo much tendernefs fhould be thrown away on fo defpicable an object as Fanny. Slipflop, well knowing how to humour her miftrefs's frenzy, proceeded to repeat, with exaggeration, if poffible, all her miftrefs had faid, and concluded with a wifh that Jofeph had been a gentleman, and that fhe could fee her lady in the arms of fuch a hufband. The lady then ftarted from the bed, and, taking a turn or two acrofs the room, cryed out, with a deep figh, "Sure he would make any woman happy!"--"Your ladyfhip," fays fhe, "would be the happieft woman in the world with him. A fig for cuftom and nonfenfe! What 'vails what people fay? Shall I be afraid of eating fweetmeats becaufe people may fay I have a fweet tooth? If I had a mind to marry a man, all the world fhould not hinder me. Your ladyfhip hath no parents to tutelar your infections; befides, he is of your ladyfhip's family now, and as good a gentleman as any in the country; and why fhould not a woman follow her mind as well as man? Why fhould not your ladyfhip marry the brother as well as your nephew the fifter. I am fure, if it was a fragrant crime, I would not perfuade your ladyfhip to it."--"But, dear Slipflop," anfwered the lady, "if I could prevail on myfelf to commit fuch a weaknefs, there is that curfed Fanny in the way, whom the idiot--O how I hate and defpife him!"--"She! a little ugly mynx," cries Slipflop; "leave her to me. I fuppofe your ladyfhip hath heard of Jofeph's fitting with one of Mr Didapper's fervants about her; and his mafter hath ordered them to carry her away by force this evening. I'll take care they fhall not want affiftance. I was talking with this gentleman, who was below, juft when your ladyfhip fent for me."--"Go back," fays the Lady Booby, "this inftant, for I expect Mr Didapper will foon be going. Do all you can; for I am refolved this wench fhall not be in our family: I will endeavour to return to the company; but let me know as foon as fhe is carried off." Slipflop went away; and her miftrefs began to arraign her own conduct in the following manner:-- "What am I doing? How do I fuffer this paffion to creep imperceptibly upon me? How many days are paft fince I could have fubmitted to afk myfelf the queftion?--Marry a footman! Diftraction! Can I afterwards bear the eyes of my acquaintance? But I can retire from them; retire with one in whom I propofe more happinefs than the world without him can give me! Retire-to feed continually on beauties which my inflamed imagination fickens with eagerly gazing on; to fatiffy every appetite, every defire, with their utmoft wifh. Ha! and do I doat thus on a footman? I defpife, I deteft my paffion.--Yet why? Is he not generous, gentle, kind?--Kind! to whom? to the meaneft wretch, a creature below my confideration. Doth he not--yes, he doth prefer her. Curfe his beauties, and the little low heart that poffeffes them; which can bafely defcend to this defpicable wench, and be ungratefully deaf to all the honours I do him. And can I then love this monfter? No, I will tear his image from my bofom, tread on him, fpurn him. I will have thofe pitiful charms, which now I defpife, mangled in my fight; for I will not fuffer the little jade I hate to riot in the beauties I contemn. No; though I defpife him myfelf, though I would fpurn him from my feet, was he to languifh at them, no other fhould tafte the happinefs I fcorn. Why do I fay happinefs? To me it would be mifery. To facrifice my reputation, my character, my rank in life, to the indulgence of a mean and a vile appetite! How I deteft the thought! How much more exquifite is the pleafure refulting from the reflection of virtue and prudence than the faint relifh of what flows from vice and folly! Whither did I fuffer this improper, this mad paffion to hurry me, only by neglecting to fummon the aids of reafon to my affiftance? Reafon, which hath now fet before me my defires in their proper colours, and immediately helped me to expel them. Yes, I thank Heaven and my pride, I have now perfectly conquered this unworthy paffion; and if there was no obftacle in its way, my pride would difdain any pleafures which could be the confequence of fo bafe, fo mean, fo vulgar--" Slipflop returned at this inftant in a violent hurry, and with the utmoft eagernefs cryed out, "O madam! I have ftrange news. Tom the footman is juft come from the George; where, it feems, Jofeph and the reft of them are a jinketting; and he fays there is a ftrange man who hath difcovered that Fanny and Jofeph are brother and fifter."--"How, Slipflop?" cries the lady, in a furprize.--"I had not time, madam," cries Slipflop, "to enquire about particles, but Tom fays it is moft certainly true." This unexpected account entirely obliterated all thofe admirable reflections which the fupreme power of reafon had fo wifely made juft before. In fhort, when defpair, which had more fhare in producing the refolutions of hatred we have feen taken, began to retreat, the lady hefitated a moment, and then, forgetting all the purport of her foliloquy, difmiffed her woman again, with orders to bid Tom attend her in the parlour, whither fhe now haftened to acquaint Pamela with the news. Pamela faid fhe could not believe it; for fhe had never heard that her mother had loft any child, or that fhe had ever had any more than Jofeph and herfelf. The lady flew into a violent rage with her, and talked of upftarts and difowning relations who had fo lately been on a level with her. Pamela made no anfwer; but her hufband, taking up her caufe, feverely reprimanded his aunt for her behaviour to his wife: he told her, if it had been earlier in the evening fhe fhould not have ftaid a moment longer in her houfe; that he was convinced, if this young woman could be proved her fifter, fhe would readily embrace her as fuch, and he himfelf would do the fame. He then defired the fellow might be fent for, and the young woman with him, which Lady Booby immediately ordered; and, thinking proper to make fome apology to Pamela for what fhe had faid, it was readily accepted, and all things reconciled. The pedlar now attended, as did Fanny and Jofeph, who would not quit her; the parfon likewife was induced, not only by curiofity, of which he had no fmall portion, but his duty, as he apprehended it, to follow them; for he continued all the way to exhort them, who were now breaking their hearts, to offer up thankfgivings, and be joyful for fo miraculous an efcape. When they arrived at Booby-Hall they were prefently called into the parlour, where the pedlar repeated the fame ftory he had told before, and infifted on the truth of every circumftance; fo that all who heard him were extremely well fatiffied of the truth, except Pamela, who imagined, as fhe had never heard either of her parents mention fuch an accident, that it muft be certainly falfe; and except the Lady Booby, who fufpected the falfehood of the ftory from her ardent defire that it fhould be true; and Jofeph, who feared its truth, from his earneft wifhes that it might prove falfe. Mr Booby now defired them all to fufpend their curiofity and abfolute belief or difbelief till the next morning, when he expected old Mr Andrews and his wife to fetch himfelf and Pamela home in his coach, and then they might be certain of certainly knowing the truth or falfehood of this relation; in which, he faid, as there were many ftrong circumftances to induce their credit, fo he could not perceive any intereft the pedlar could have in inventing it, or in endeavouring to impofe fuch a falfehood on them. The Lady Booby, who was very little ufed to fuch company, entertained them all--_viz_. her nephew, his wife, her brother and fifter, the beau, and the parfon, with great good humour at her own table. As to the pedlar, fhe ordered him to be made as welcome as poffible by her fervants. All the company in the parlour, except the difappointed lovers, who fat fullen and filent, were full of mirth; for Mr Booby had prevailed on Jofeph to afk Mr Didapper's pardon, with which he was perfectly fatiffied. Many jokes paffed between the beau and the parfon, chiefly on each other's drefs; thefe afforded much diverfion to the company. Pamela chid her brother Jofeph for the concern which he expreft at difcovering a new fifter. She faid, if he loved Fanny as he ought, with a pure affection, he had no reafon to lament being related to her.--Upon which Adams began to difcourfe on Platonic love; whence he made a quick tranfition to the joys in the next world, and concluded with ftrongly afferting that there was no fuch thing as pleafure in this. At which Pamela and her hufband fmiled on one another. This happy pair propofing to retire (for no other perfon gave the leaft fymptom of defiring reft), they all repaired to feveral beds provided for them in the fame houfe; nor was Adams himfelf fuffered to go home, it being a ftormy night. Fanny indeed often begged fhe might go home with the parfon; but her ftay was fo ftrongly infifted on, that fhe at laft, by Jofeph's advice, confented. CHAPTER XIV. _Containing feveral curious night-adventures, in which Mr Adams fell into many hair-breadth 'fcapes, partly owing to his goodnefs, and partly to his inadvertency._ About an hour after they had all feparated (it being now paft three in the morning), beau Didapper, whofe paffion for Fanny permitted him not to clofe his eyes, but had employed his imagination in contrivances how to fatiffy his defires, at laft hit on a method by which he hoped to effect it. He had ordered his fervant to bring him word where Fanny lay, and had received his information; he therefore arofe, put on his breeches and nightgown, and ftole foftly along the gallery which led to her apartment; and, being come to the door, as he imagined it, he opened it with the leaft noife poffible and entered the chamber. A favour now invaded his noftrils which he did not expect in the room of fo fweet a young creature, and which might have probably had no good effect on a cooler lover. However, he groped out the bed with difficulty, for there was not a glimpfe of light, and, opening the curtains, he whifpered in Jofeph's voice (for he was an excellent mimic), "Fanny, my angel! I am come to inform thee that I have difcovered the falfehood of the ftory we laft night heard. I am no longer thy brother, but the lover; nor will I be delayed the enjoyment of thee one moment longer. You have fufficient affurances of my conftancy not to doubt my marrying you, and it would be want of love to deny me the poffeffion of thy charms."--So faying, he difencumbered himfelf from the little clothes he had on, and, leaping into bed, embraced his angel, as he conceived her, with great rapture. If he was furprized at receiving no anfwer, he was no lefs pleafed to find his hug returned with equal ardour. He remained not long in this fweet confufion; for both he and his paramour prefently difcovered their error. Indeed it was no other than the accomplifhed Slipflop whom he had engaged; but, though fhe immediately knew the perfon whom fhe had miftaken for Jofeph, he was at a lofs to guefs at the reprefentative of Fanny. He had fo little feen or taken notice of this gentlewoman, that light itfelf would have afforded him no affiftance in his conjecture. Beau Didapper no fooner had perceived his miftake than he attempted to efcape from the bed with much greater hafte than he had made to it; but the watchful Slipflop prevented him. For that prudent woman, being difappointed of thofe delicious offerings which her fancy had promifed her pleafure, refolved to make an immediate facrifice to her virtue. Indeed fhe wanted an opportunity to heal fome wounds, which her late conduct had, fhe feared, given her reputation; and, as fhe had a wonderful prefence of mind, fhe conceived the perfon of the unfortunate beau to be luckily thrown in her way to reftore her lady's opinion of her impregnable chaftity. At that inftant, therefore, when he offered to leap from the bed, fhe caught faft hold of his fhirt, at the fame time roaring out, "O thou villain! who haft attacked my chaftity, and, I believe, ruined me in my fleep; I will fwear a rape againft thee, I will profecute thee with the utmoft vengeance." The beau attempted to get loofe, but fhe held him faft, and when he ftruggled fhe cried out "Murder! murder! rape! robbery! ruin!" At which words, parfon Adams, who lay in the next chamber, wakeful, and meditating on the pedlar's difcovery, jumped out of bed, and, without ftaying to put a rag of clothes on, haftened into the apartment whence the cries proceeded. He made directly to the bed in the dark, where, laying hold of the beau's fkin (for Slipflop had torn his fhirt almoft off), and finding his fkin extremely foft, and hearing him in a low voice begging Slipflop to let him go, he no longer doubted but this was the young woman in danger of ravifhing, and immediately falling on the bed, and laying hold on Slipflop's chin, where he found a rough beard, his belief was confirmed; he therefore refcued the beau, who prefently made his efcape, and then, turning towards Slipflop, received fuch a cuff on his chops, that, his wrath kindling inftantly, he offered to return the favour fo ftoutly, that had poor Slipflop received the fift, which in the dark paffed by her and fell on the pillow, fhe would moft probably have given up the ghoft. Adams, miffing his blow, fell directly on Slipflop, who cuffed and fcratched as well as fhe could; nor was he behindhand with her in his endeavours, but happily the darknefs of the night befriended her. She then cried fhe was a woman; but Adams anfwered, fhe was rather the devil, and if fhe was he would grapple with him; and, being again irritated by another ftroke on his chops, he gave her fuch a remembrance in the guts, that fhe began to roar loud enough to be heard all over the houfe. Adams then, feizing her by the hair (for her double-clout had fallen off in the fcuffle), pinned her head down to the bolfter, and then both called for lights together. The Lady Booby, who was as wakeful as any of her guefts, had been alarmed from the beginning; and, being a woman of a bold fpirit, fhe flipt on a nightgown, petticoat, and flippers, and taking a candle, which always burnt in her chamber, in her hand, fhe walked undauntedly to Slipflop's room; where fhe entered juft at the inftant as Adams had difcovered, by the two mountains which Slipflop carried before her, that he was concerned with a female. He then concluded her to be a witch, and faid he fancied thofe breafts gave fuck to a legion of devils. Slipflop, feeing Lady Booby enter the room, cried help! or I am ravifhed, with a moft audible voice: and Adams, perceiving the light, turned haftily, and faw the lady (as fhe did him) juft as fhe came to the feet of the bed; nor did her modefty, when fhe found the naked condition of Adams, fuffer her to approach farther. She then began to revile the parfon as the wickedeft of all men, and particularly railed at his impudence in chufing her houfe for the fcene of his debaucheries, and her own woman for the object of his beftiality. Poor Adams had before difcovered the countenance of his bedfellow, and, now firft recollecting he was naked, he was no lefs confounded than Lady Booby herfelf, and immediately whipt under the bedclothes, whence the chafte Slipflop endeavoured in vain to fhut him out. Then putting forth his head, on which, by way of ornament, he wore a flannel nightcap, he protefted his innocence, and afked ten thoufand pardons of Mrs Slipflop for the blows he had ftruck her, vowing he had miftaken her for a witch. Lady Booby, then cafting her eyes on the ground, obferved fomething fparkle with great luftre, which, when fhe had taken it up, appeared to be a very fine pair of diamond buttons for the fleeves. A little farther fhe faw lie the fleeve itfelf of a fhirt with laced ruffles. "Heyday!" fays fhe, "what is the meaning of this?" "O, madam," fays Slipflop, "I don't know what hath happened, I have been fo terrified. Here may have been a dozen men in the room." "To whom belongs this laced fhirt and jewels?" fays the lady. "Undoubtedly," cries the parfon, "to the young gentleman whom I miftook for a woman on coming into the room, whence proceeded all the fubfequent miftakes; for if I had fufpected him for a man, I would have feized him, had he been another Hercules, though, indeed, he feems rather to refemble Hylas." He then gave an account of the reafon of his rifing from bed, and the reft, till the lady came into the room; at which, and the figures of Slipflop and her gallant, whofe heads only were vifible at the oppofite corners of the bed, fhe could not refrain from laughter; nor did Slipflop perfift in accufing the parfon of any motions towards a rape. The lady therefore defired him to return to his bed as foon as fhe was departed, and then ordering Slipflop to rife and attend her in her own room, fhe returned herfelf thither. When fhe was gone, Adams renewed his petitions for pardon to Mrs Slipflop, who, with a moft Chriftian temper, not only forgave, but began to move with much courtefy towards him, which he taking as a hint to begin, immediately quitted the bed, and made the beft of his way towards his own; but unluckily, inftead of turning to the right, he turned to the left, and went to the apartment where Fanny lay, who (as the reader may remember) had not flept a wink the preceding night, and who was fo hagged out with what had happened to her in the day, that, notwithftanding all thoughts of her Jofeph, fhe was fallen into fo profound a fleep, that all the noife in the adjoining room had not been able to difturb her. Adams groped out the bed, and, turning the clothes down foftly, a cuftom Mrs Adams had long accuftomed him to, crept in, and depofited his carcafe on the bed-poft, a place which that good woman had always affigned him. As the cat or lap-dog of fome lovely nymph, for whom ten thoufand lovers languifh, lies quietly by the fide of the charming maid, and, ignorant of the fcene of delight on which they repofe, meditates the future capture of a moufe, or furprifal of a plate of bread and butter: fo Adams lay by the fide of Fanny, ignorant of the paradife to which he was fo near; nor could the emanation of fweets which flowed from her breath overpower the fumes of tobacco which played in the parfon's noftrils. And now fleep had not overtaken the good man, when Jofeph, who had fecretly appointed Fanny to come to her at the break of day, rapped foftly at the chamber-door, which when he had repeated twice, Adams cryed, "Come in, whoever you are." Jofeph thought he had miftaken the door, though fhe had given him the moft exact directions; however, knowing his friend's voice, he opened it, and faw fome female veftments lying on a chair. Fanny waking at the fame inftant, and ftretching out her hand on Adams's beard, fhe cried out,--"O heavens! where am I?" "Blefs me! where am I?" faid the parfon. Then Fanny fcreamed, Adams leapt out of bed, and Jofeph ftood, as the tragedians call it, like the ftatue of Surprize. "How came fhe into my room?" cryed Adams. "How came you into hers?" cryed Jofeph, in an aftonifhment. "I know nothing of the matter," anfwered Adams, "but that fhe is a veftal for me. As I am a Chriftian, I know not whether fhe is a man or woman. He is an infidel who doth not believe in witchcraft. They as furely exift now as in the days of Saul. My clothes are bewitched away too, and Fanny's brought into their place." For he ftill infifted he was in his own apartment; but Fanny denied it vehemently, and faid his attempting to perfuade Jofeph of fuch a falfehood convinced her of his wicked defigns. "How!" faid Jofeph in a rage, "hath he offered any rudenefs to you?" She anfwered--She could not accufe him of any more than villanoufly ftealing to bed to her, which fhe thought rudenefs fufficient, and what no man would do without a wicked intention. Jofeph's great opinion of Adams was not eafily to be ftaggered, and when he heard from Fanny that no harm had happened he grew a little cooler; yet ftill he was confounded, and, as he knew the houfe, and that the women's apartments were on this fide Mrs Slipflop's room, and the men's on the other, he was convinced that he was in Fanny's chamber. Affuring Adams therefore of this truth, he begged him to give fome account how he came there. Adams then, ftanding in his fhirt, which did not offend Fanny, as the curtains of the bed were drawn, related all that had happened; and when he had ended Jofeph told him,--It was plain he had miftaken by turning to the right inftead of the left. "Odfo!" cries Adams, "that's true: as fure as fixpence, you have hit on the very thing." He then traverfed the room, rubbing his hands, and begged Fanny's pardon, affuring her he did not know whether fhe was man or woman. That innocent creature firmly believing all he faid, told him fhe was no longer angry, and begged Jofeph to conduct him into his own apartment, where he fhould ftay himfelf till fhe had put her clothes on. Jofeph and Adams accordingly departed, and the latter foon was convinced of the miftake he had committed; however, whilft he was dreffing himfelf, he often afferted he believed in the power of witchcraft notwithftanding, and did not fee how a Chriftian could deny it. CHAPTER XV. _The arrival of Gaffar and Gammar Andrews, with another perfon not much expected; and a perfect folution of the difficulties raifed by the pedlar._ As foon as Fanny was dreft Jofeph returned to her, and they had a long converfation together, the conclufion of which was, that, if they found themfelves to be really brother and fifter, they vowed a perpetual celibacy, and to live together all their days, and indulge a Platonic friendfhip for each other. The company were all very merry at breakfaft, and Jofeph and Fanny rather more chearful than the preceding night. The Lady Booby produced the diamond button, which the beau moft readily owned, and alledged that he was very fubject to walk in his fleep. Indeed, he was far from being afhamed of his amour, and rather endeavoured to infinuate that more than was really true had paffed between him and the fair Slipflop. Their tea was fcarce over when news came of the arrival of old Mr Andrews and his wife. They were immediately introduced, and kindly received by the Lady Booby, whofe heart went now pit-a-pat, as did thofe of Jofeph and Fanny. They felt, perhaps, little lefs anxiety in this interval than Oedipus himfelf, whilft his fate was revealing. Mr Booby firft opened the caufe by informing the old gentleman that he had a child in the company more than he knew of, and, taking Fanny by the hand, told him, this was that daughter of his who had been ftolen away by gypfies in her infancy. Mr Andrews, after expreffing fome aftonifhment, affured his honour that he had never loft a daughter by gypfies, nor ever had any other children than Jofeph and Pamela. Thefe words were a cordial to the two lovers; but had a different effect on Lady Booby. She ordered the pedlar to be called, who recounted his ftory as he had done before.--At the end of which, old Mrs Andrews, running to Fanny, embraced her, crying out, "She is, fhe is my child!" The company were all amazed at this difagreement between the man and his wife; and the blood had now forfaken the cheeks of the lovers, when the old woman, turning to her hufband, who was more furprized than all the reft, and having a little recovered her own fpirits, delivered herfelf as follows: "You may remember, my dear, when you went a ferjeant to Gibraltar, you left me big with child; you ftayed abroad, you know, upwards of three years. In your abfence I was brought to bed, I verily believe, of this daughter, whom I am fure I have reafon to remember, for I fuckled her at this very breaft till the day fhe was ftolen from me. One afternoon, when the child was about a year, or a year and a half old, or thereabouts, two gypfy-women came to the door and offered to tell my fortune. One of them had a child in her lap. I fhowed them my hand, and defired to know if you was ever to come home again, which I remember as well as if it was but yefterday: they faithfully promifed me you fhould.--I left the girl in the cradle and went to draw them a cup of liquor, the beft I had: when I returned with the pot (I am fure I was not abfent longer than whilft I am telling it to you) the women were gone. I was afraid they had ftolen fomething, and looked and looked, but to no purpofe, and, Heaven knows, I had very little for them to fteal. At laft, hearing the child cry in the cradle, I went to take it up--but, O the living! how was I furprized to find, inftead of my own girl that I had put into the cradle, who was as fine a fat thriving child as you fhall fee in a fummer's day, a poor fickly boy, that did not feem to have an hour to live. I ran out, pulling my hair off and crying like any mad after the women, but never could hear a word of them from that day to this. When I came back the poor infant (which is our Jofeph there, as ftout as he now ftands) lifted up its eyes upon me fo piteoufly, that, to be fure, notwithftanding my paffion, I could not find in my heart to do it any mifchief. A neighbour of mine, happening to come in at the fame time, and hearing the cafe, advifed me to take care of this poor child, and God would perhaps one day reftore me my own. Upon which I took the child up, and fuckled it to be fure, all the world as if it had been born of my own natural body; and as true as I am alive, in a little time I loved the boy all to nothing as if it had been my own girl.--Well, as I was faying, times growing very hard, I having two children and nothing but my own work, which was little enough, God knows, to maintain them, was obliged to afk relief of the parifh; but, inftead of giving it me, they removed me, by juftices' warrants, fifteen miles, to the place where I now live, where I had not been long fettled before you came home. Jofeph (for that was the name I gave him myfelf--the Lord knows whether he was baptized or no, or by what name), Jofeph, I fay, feemed to me about five years old when you returned; for I believe he is two or three years older than our daughter here (for I am thoroughly convinced fhe is the fame); and when you faw him you faid he was a chopping boy, without ever minding his age; and fo I, feeing you did not fufpect anything of the matter, thought I might e'en as well keep it to myfelf, for fear you fhould not love him as well as I did. And all this is veritably true, and I will take my oath of it before any juftice in the kingdom." The pedlar, who had been fummoned by the order of Lady Booby, liftened with the utmoft attention to Gammar Andrews's ftory; and, when fhe had finifhed, afked her if the fuppofititious child had no mark on its breaft? To which fhe anfwered, "Yes, he had as fine a ftrawberry as ever grew in a garden." This Jofeph acknowledged, and, unbuttoning his coat, at the interceffion of the company, fhowed to them. "Well," fays Gaffar Andrews, who was a comical fly old fellow, and very likely defired to have no more children than he could keep, "you have proved, I think, very plainly, that this boy doth not belong to us; but how are you certain that the girl is ours?" The parfon then brought the pedlar forward, and defired him to repeat the ftory which he had communicated to him the preceding day at the ale-houfe; which he complied with, and related what the reader, as well as Mr Adams, hath feen before. He then confirmed, from his wife's report, all the circumftances of the exchange, and of the ftrawberry on Jofeph's breaft. At the repetition of the word ftrawberry, Adams, who had feen it without any emotion, ftarted and cried, "Blefs me! fomething comes into my head." But before he had time to bring anything out a fervant called him forth. When he was gone the pedlar affured Jofeph that his parents were perfons of much greater circumftances than thofe he had hitherto miftaken for fuch; for that he had been ftolen from a gentleman's houfe by thofe whom they call gypfies, and had been kept by them during a whole year, when, looking on him as in a dying condition, they had exchanged him for the other healthier child, in the manner before related. He faid, As to the name of his father, his wife had either never known or forgot it; but that fhe had acquainted him he lived about forty miles from the place where the exchange had been made, and which way, promifing to fpare no pains in endeavouring with him to difcover the place. But Fortune, which feldom doth good or ill, or makes men happy or miferable, by halves, refolved to fpare him this labour. The reader may pleafe to recollect that Mr Wilfon had intended a journey to the weft, in which he was to pafs through Mr Adams's parifh, and had promifed to call on him. He was now arrived at the Lady Booby's gates for that purpofe, being directed thither from the parfon's houfe, and had fent in the fervant whom we have above feen call Mr Adams forth. This had no fooner mentioned the difcovery of a ftolen child, and had uttered the word ftrawberry, than Mr Wilfon, with wildnefs in his looks, and the utmoft eagernefs in his words, begged to be fhewed into the room, where he entered without the leaft regard to any of the company but Jofeph, and, embracing him with a complexion all pale and trembling, defired to fee the mark on his breaft; the parfon followed him capering, rubbing his hands, and crying out, _Hic eft quem quaeris; inventus eft, &c_. Jofeph complied with the requeft of Mr Wilfon, who no fooner faw the mark than, abandoning himfelf to the moft extravagant rapture of paffion, he embraced Jofeph with inexpreffible ecftafy, and cried out in tears of joy, "I have difcovered my fon, I have him again in my arms!" Jofeph was not fufficiently apprized yet to tafte the fame delight with his father (for fo in reality he was); however, he returned fome warmth to his embraces: but he no fooner perceived, from his father's account, the agreement of every circumftance, of perfon, time, and place, than he threw himfelf at his feet, and, embracing his knees, with tears begged his bleffing, which was given with much affection, and received with fuch refpect, mixed with fuch tendernefs on both fides, that it affected all prefent; but none fo much as Lady Booby, who left the room in an agony, which was but too much perceived, and not very charitably accounted for by fome of the company. CHAPTER XVI. _Being the laft in which this true hiftory is brought to a happy conclufion._ Fanny was very little behind her Jofeph in the duty fhe expreft towards her parents, and the joy fhe evidenced in difcovering them. Gammar Andrews kiffed her, and faid, She was heartily glad to fee her; but for her part, fhe could never love any one better than Jofeph. Gaffar Andrews teftified no remarkable emotion: he bleffed and kiffed her, but complained bitterly that he wanted his pipe, not having had a whiff that morning. Mr Booby, who knew nothing of his aunt's fondnefs, imputed her abrupt departure to her pride, and difdain of the family into which he was married; he was therefore defirous to be gone with the utmoft celerity; and now, having congratulated Mr Wilfon and Jofeph on the difcovery, he faluted Fanny, called her fifter, and introduced her as fuch to Pamela, who behaved with great decency on the occafion. He now fent a meffage to his aunt, who returned that fhe wifhed him a good journey, but was too difordered to fee any company: he therefore prepared to fet out, having invited Mr Wilfon to his houfe; and Pamela and Jofeph both fo infifted on his complying, that he at laft confented, having firft obtained a meffenger from Mr Booby to acquaint his wife with the news; which, as he knew it would render her completely happy, he could not prevail on himfelf to delay a moment in acquainting her with. The company were ranged in this manner: the two old people, with their two daughters, rode in the coach; the fquire, Mr Wilfon, Jofeph, parfon Adams, and the pedlar, proceeded on horfeback. In their way, Jofeph informed his father of his intended match with Fanny; to which, though he expreffed fome reluctance at firft, on the eagernefs of his fon's inftances he confented; faying, if fhe was fo good a creature as fhe appeared, and he defcribed her, he thought the difadvantages of birth and fortune might be compenfated. He however infifted on the match being deferred till he had feen his mother; in which, Jofeph perceiving him pofitive, with great duty obeyed him, to the great delight of parfon Adams, who by thefe means faw an opportunity of fulfilling the Church forms, and marrying his parifhioners without a licence. Mr Adams, greatly exulting on this occafion (for fuch ceremonies were matters of no fmall moment with him), accidentally gave fpurs to his horfe, which the generous beaft difdaining--for he was of high mettle, and had been ufed to more expert riders than the gentleman who at prefent beftrode him, for whofe horfemanfhip he had perhaps fome contempt--immediately ran away full fpeed, and played fo many antic tricks that he tumbled the parfon from his back; which Jofeph perceiving, came to his relief. This accident afforded infinite merriment to the fervants, and no lefs frighted poor Fanny, who beheld him as he paffed by the coach; but the mirth of the one and terror of the other were foon determined, when the parfon declared he had received no damage. The horfe having freed himfelf from his unworthy rider, as he probably thought him, proceeded to make the beft of his way; but was ftopped by a gentleman and his fervants, who were travelling the oppofite way, and were now at a little diftance from the coach. They foon met; and as one of the fervants delivered Adams his horfe, his mafter hailed him, and Adams, looking up, prefently recollected he was the juftice of peace before whom he and Fanny had made their appearance. The parfon prefently faluted him very kindly; and the juftice informed him that he had found the fellow who attempted to fwear againft him and the young woman the very next day, and had committed him to Salifbury gaol, where he was charged with many robberies. Many compliments having paffed between the parfon and the juftice, the latter proceeded on his journey; and the former, having with fome difdain refufed Jofeph's offer of changing horfes, and declared he was as able a horfeman as any in the kingdom, remounted his beaft; and now the company again proceeded, and happily arrived at their journey's end, Mr Adams, by good luck, rather than by good riding, efcaping a fecond fall. The company, arriving at Mr Booby's houfe, were all received by him in the moft courteous and entertained in the moft fplendid manner, after the cuftom of the old Englifh hofpitality, which is ftill preferved in fome very few families in the remote parts of England. They all paffed that day with the utmoft fatiffaction; it being perhaps impoffible to find any fet of people more folidly and fincerely happy. Jofeph and Fanny found means to be alone upwards of two hours, which were the fhorteft but the fweeteft imaginable. In the morning Mr Wilfon propofed to his fon to make a vifit with him to his mother; which, notwithftanding his dutiful inclinations, and a longing defire he had to fee her, a little concerned him, as he muft be obliged to leave his Fanny; but the goodnefs of Mr Booby relieved him; for he propofed to fend his own coach and fix for Mrs Wilfon, whom Pamela fo very earneftly invited, that Mr Wilfon at length agreed with the entreaties of Mr Booby and Jofeph, and fuffered the coach to go empty for his wife. On Saturday night the coach returned with Mrs Wilfon, who added one more to this happy affembly. The reader may imagine much better and quicker too than I can defcribe the many embraces and tears of joy which fucceeded her arrival. It is fufficient to fay fhe was eafily prevailed with to follow her hufband's example in confenting to the match. On Sunday Mr Adams performed the fervice at the fquire's parifh church, the curate of which very kindly exchanged duty, and rode twenty miles to the Lady Booby's parifh fo to do; being particularly charged not to omit publifhing the banns, being the third and laft time. At length the happy day arrived which was to put Jofeph in the poffeffion of all his wifhes. He arofe, and dreft himfelf in a neat but plain fuit of Mr Booby's, which exactly fitted him; for he refufed all finery; as did Fanny likewife, who could be prevailed on by Pamela to attire herfelf in nothing richer than a white dimity nightgown. Her fhift indeed, which Pamela prefented her, was of the fineft kind, and had an edging of lace round the bofom. She likewife equipped her with a pair of fine white thread ftockings, which were all fhe would accept; for fhe wore one of her own fhort round-eared caps, and over it a little ftraw hat, lined with cherry-coloured filk, and tied with a cherry-coloured ribbon. In this drefs fhe came forth from her chamber, blufhing and breathing fweets; and was by Jofeph, whofe eyes fparkled fire, led to church, the whole family attending, where Mr Adams performed the ceremony; at which nothing was fo remarkable as the extraordinary and unaffected modefty of Fanny, unlefs the true Chriftian piety of Adams, who publickly rebuked Mr Booby and Pamela for laughing in fo facred a place, and on fo folemn an occafion. Our parfon would have done no lefs to the higheft prince on earth; for, though he paid all fubmiffion and deference to his fuperiors in other matters, where the leaft fpice of religion intervened he immediately loft all refpect of perfons. It was his maxim, that he was a fervant of the Higheft, and could not, without departing from his duty, give up the leaft article of his honour or of his caufe to the greateft earthly potentate. Indeed, he always afferted that Mr Adams at church with his furplice on, and Mr Adams without that ornament in any other place, were two very different perfons. When the church rites were over Jofeph led his blooming bride back to Mr Booby's (for the diftance was fo very little they did not think proper to ufe a coach); the whole company attended them likewife on foot; and now a moft magnificent entertainment was provided, at which parfon Adams demonftrated an appetite furprizing as well as furpaffing every one prefent. Indeed the only perfons who betrayed any deficiency on this occafion were thofe on whofe account the feaft was provided. They pampered their imaginations with the much more exquifite repaft which the approach of night promifed them; the thoughts of which filled both their minds, though with different fenfations; the one all defire, while the other had her wifhes tempered with fears. At length, after a day paffed with the utmoft merriment, corrected by the ftricteft decency, in which, however, parfon Adams, being well filled with ale and pudding, had given a loofe to more facetioufnefs than was ufual to him, the happy, the bleft moment arrived when Fanny retired with her mother, her mother-in-law, and her fifter. She was foon undreft; for fhe had no jewels to depofit in their cafkets, nor fine laces to fold with the niceft exactnefs. Undreffing to her was properly difcovering, not putting off, ornaments; for, as all her charms were the gifts of nature, fhe could diveft herfelf of none. How, reader, fhall I give thee an adequate idea of this lovely young creature? the bloom of rofes and lilies might a little illuftrate her complexion, or their fmell her fweetnefs; but to comprehend her entirely, conceive youth, health, bloom, neatnefs, and innocence, in her bridal bed; conceive all thefe in their utmoft perfection, and you may place the charming Fanny's picture before your eyes. Jofeph no fooner heard fhe was in bed than he fled with the utmoft eagernefs to her. A minute carried him into her arms, where we fhall leave this happy couple to enjoy the private rewards of their conftancy; rewards fo great and fweet, that I apprehend Jofeph neither envied the nobleft duke, nor Fanny the fineft duchefs, that night. The third day Mr Wilfon and his wife, with their fon and daughter, returned home; where they now live together in a ftate of blifs fcarce ever equalled. Mr Booby hath, with unprecedented generofity, given Fanny a fortune of two thoufand pounds, which Jofeph hath laid out in a little eftate in the fame parifh with his father, which he now occupies (his father having ftocked it for him); and Fanny prefides with moft excellent management in his dairy; where, however, fhe is not at prefent very able to buftle much, being, as Mr Wilfon informs me in his laft letter, extremely big with her firft child. Mr Booby hath prefented Mr Adams with a living of one hundred and thirty pounds a year. He at firft refufed it, refolving not to quit his parifhioners, with whom he had lived fo long; but, on recollecting he might keep a curate at this living, he hath been lately inducted into it. The pedlar, befides feveral handfome prefents, both from Mr Wilfon and Mr Booby, is, by the latter's intereft, made an excifeman; a truft which he difcharges with fuch juftice, that he is greatly beloved in his neighbourhood. As for the Lady Booby, fhe returned to London in a few days, where a young captain of dragoons, together with eternal parties at cards, foon obliterated the memory of Jofeph. Jofeph remains bleft with his Fanny, whom he doats on with the utmoft tendernefs, which is all returned on her fide. The happinefs of this couple is a perpetual fountain of pleafure to their fond parents; and, what is particularly remarkable, he declares he will imitate them in their retirement, nor will be prevailed on by any bookfellers, or their authors, to make his appearance in high life. THE END.